The Project Gutenberg eBook of Harvesting Ants and Trap-Door Spiders and
Supplement, by J. Traherne Moggridge

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Harvesting Ants and Trap-Door Spiders and Supplement
       Notes and Observations on Their Habits and Dwellings

Author: J. Traherne Moggridge

Release Date: March 22, 2021 [eBook #64654]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Mark C. Orton, Tom Cosmas and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARVESTING ANTS AND TRAP-DOOR
SPIDERS AND SUPPLEMENT ***




         Transcriber's Note: Emphasis denoted as _Italics_.
           Whole and fractional parts of numbers as 123-4/5.


                        _BY THE SAME AUTHOR._

        Royal 8vo. In 4 parts, each, with 25 Coloured Plates,
               15_s._, or complete in one vol. 63_s._

               CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE FLORA OF MENTONE,

                              AND TO A

                    WINTER FLORA OF THE RIVIERA,

           _Including the Coast from Marseilles to Genoa_.

                                 BY

                    J. TRAHERNE MOGGRIDGE, F.L.S.

         L. REEVE & CO., 5, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.




                           HARVESTING ANTS

                                 AND

                         TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS.




                           HARVESTING ANTS

                                 AND

                         TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS.

                   NOTES AND OBSERVATIONS ON THEIR

                        Habits and Dwellings.

                                 BY

                    J. TRAHERNE MOGGRIDGE, F.L.S.

                           [Illustration]

                               LONDON:
         L. REEVE & CO., 5, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
                                1873.


                               LONDON:

         SAVILL, EDWARDS AND CO., PRINTERS, CHANDOS STREET,
                           COVENT GARDEN.


  Transcriber Note: The current volume is a combination of
    the Harvesting Ants and Trap-door Spiders plus the
    Supplement to that volume. The table of Contents has
    been modified to reflect this.


CONTENTS.


  PART I.
                                              PAGE

      HARVESTING ANTS                            1


  PART II.

      TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS                          71

  SUPPLEMENTS

      SUPPLEMENT TO HARVESTING ANTS             157

      SUPPLEMENT TO TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS           180

      SPECIFIC DESCRIPTIONS OF SPIDERS          254






EXPLANATION OF PLATES.


PART I.--HARVESTING ANTS.

  Plate I., p. 21, fig. A.--View of the entrance to a nest of _Atta
    barbara_, showing part of a train of ants bearing seeds, the
    conical mound of refuse thrown out, and some seedlings, which
    have sprung up from seeds accidentally dropped by the ants; B,
    one of the larger workers of this species, of the natural size,
    and B 1, its abdomen and pedicle, with two nodes, magnified; C*,
    one of the smaller workers, of the natural size; C, a male, of
    the natural size; D, a female, of the natural size; D 1, wing of
    the same, magnified; D 2, mouth organs of the same, magnified,
    with the mandibles removed, the two outer pieces being the
    maxillæ and their palpi, and the lozenge-shaped piece the labium,
    from the upper part of which the labial palpi spring, while
    behind the labium is the true tongue; D 3, one of the mandibles,
    magnified; E, a larva, of the natural size, and E 1, the same,
    magnified.

  Plate II., p. 22, fig. A.--A trowel containing earth, in which a
    granary full of seeds is lying almost undisturbed, of the natural
    size; B, the crater-like entrances found at the mouths of the
    nests of _Atta structor_, reduced to one-half the natural size.

  Plate III., p. 23.--The floors of three granaries of _Atta
    barbara_, surrounded by the much coarser gravelly earth, of the
    natural size.

  Plate IV., p. 31.--A mass of earth pierced by roots, in which the
    ants (_Atta barbara_) have made their granaries and galleries.
    The galleries were full of seeds when first laid open. Of the
    natural size.

  Plate V., p. 33, fig. A.--Galleries and terminal cells of a nest of
    _Atta barbara_, excavated in the living sandstone rock, drawn _in
    situ_, of the natural size; B, part of a cylindrical gallery from
    another rock-nest, and B 1, the same gallery seen in front, of
    the natural size.

  Plate VI., p. 35, fig. A.--A sprouting hemp-seed, part of the
    radicle of which has been gnawed by the ants, of the natural
    size; A 1, the same, magnified, _rad._ radicle; A 2, an entire
    sprouting seed of the same, magnified; B, a sprouting pea, part
    of the radicle of which has been gnawed off; B 1, the same,
    magnified; B 2, the same stripped of its coat, and showing the
    two seed leaves; C, a sprouting "canary-seed" (the grain of
    _Phalaris canariensis_), part of the fibril of which has been
    gnawed off; C 1, the same, magnified, _rad._ the radicle which
    remains undeveloped, and _fib._ the fibril or first rootlet; C
    2, an unmutilated sprouting "canary seed;" D, a mass of earth
    taken out of the heart of a nest of _Atta barbara_, in which a
    spherical cell, made of hardened earth, was buried. It contained
    grass seeds, among which I found ants at work, and seeds of the
    same grass still in their husks lay in the gallery leading up to
    the entrance of this cell; D 1, the same, further freed from the
    earth, and having part of one side removed, so as to show the
    interior and the small lower opening leading out from the bottom
    of the cell.


PART II.--TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS.

  Plate VII., p. 88, fig. A.--The nest of _Cteniza fodiens_, the
    lower part of which is seen in section lying in the earth, the
    door is artificially represented as partly open; A 1, surface
    of the door viewed from above; A 2, the spider; A 3, the spider
    deprived of its legs, from a specimen preserved in spirits [figs.
    A, A 1, A 2, and A 3, are of the natural size]; A 4, the spider
    viewed sideways, with the legs removed; A 5, the eyes, viewed
    from above and in front; A 6, the cephalothorax and falces; A 7,
    the left hand falx, viewed from the inner side; A 8, the fang of
    the same; A 9, the tarsal joint of the foremost right leg; A 10,
    one of the two larger and the smallest claw of the same [figs.
    A 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10, all magnified]. Fig. B, the door
    of a nest of the same kind, concealed by lichens, below which,
    on the left hand, the doors of two minute nests of _Nemesia
    meridionalis_ are seen; B 1, the same, with the doors open; C,
    the door and mouth of tube of a nest similar to that at A; C 1,
    the upper surface of this door, which is slightly convex.

  Plate VIII., p. 94, fig. A.--The nest of _Nemesia cæmentaria_;
    A 1, the door of the same, partially open; A 2, the spider; A
    3, the same deprived of its legs, from a specimen preserved in
    spirits [figs. A, A 1, 2, and 3, of the natural size]; figs. A
    4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 as in Plate VII., and magnified; B, a
    moss-covered lump of earth, in which the door of a nest of the
    same type as that at A lies concealed; B 1, the same, with the
    door open; C, the door and mouth of another similar nest, showing
    the claw marks on its under surface; D, the closed door of a
    third nest of the same kind; D 1, the same, opened.

  Plate IX., p. 98, fig. A.--The nest of _Nemesia meridionalis_; A
    1, the open surface-door and mouth of the tube of the same; A 2,
    the inner and upper surface of the lower door; A 3, the spider;
    A 4, the same deprived of its legs, from a specimen preserved in
    spirits [figs. A, A 1, 2, 3, and 4 are of the natural size]; A
    5, the spider viewed sideways, with the legs removed; A 6, the
    eyes, viewed from above and in front; A 7, the cephalothorax and
    falces; A 8, the left hand falx viewed from the inner side; A
    9, the fang of the same; A 10, the tarsal joint of the foremost
    right leg; A 11, one of the two larger and the smallest claw of
    the same [figs. A 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11, magnified]; B, a
    mass of earth containing the minute nest of a young spider (_N.
    meridionalis_); B 1, the lower door of this nest; B 2, the spider
    [figs. B, B 1, and 2, of the natural size].

  Plate X., p. 100, fig. A.--Part of a nest of _N. meridionalis_; B,
    the new and larger upper door of a nest of this spider, with the
    former and smaller upper door partially united to it; C, another
    example of enlargement in the upper door of the same spider,
    showing traces of two previous doors now incorporated. [All the
    figures are of the natural size.]

  Plate XI., p. 105, fig. A.--The upper part of a nest of _N.
    meridionalis_ concealed in a plant of Ceterach fern; A 1 and A 2,
    a minute cork-door, closed and open, which I saw constructed by a
    very young spider [either _Cteniza fodiens_, or, more probably,
    _Nemesia cæmentaria_] at the mouth of a hole in the mass of earth
    containing the nest of _N. meridionalis_ figured at A. This hole
    may be seen on the right of the fern. B, the door of a small nest
    of _N. meridionalis_, as seen from above, in its natural position
    in a steeply sloping bank; B 1, part of the same nest placed
    in an upright position, and showing the surface door open and
    the lower door closing the branch; B 2, the same with the lower
    door pushed across so as to close the main tube; B 3, 4, and 5,
    different views of this second door. [All the figures in this
    plate are of the natural size.]

  Plate XII., p. 106, fig. A.--The nest of _N. Eleanora_ with the
    surface door artificially represented as being open; A 1, the
    outer side of the surface door of the same nest into which mosses
    of two kinds are woven; A 2, the second door of the same nest;
    A 3, the spider; A 4, the same deprived of its legs, from a
    specimen preserved in spirits [figs. A, A 1, 2, 3, and 4 are of
    the natural size]; fig. A 5, the spider viewed sideways, with the
    legs removed; A 6, the eyes viewed from above and in front; A
    7, the cephalothorax and falces; A 8, the left-hand falx viewed
    from the inner side; A 9, the fang of the same; A 10, the tarsal
    joint of the foremost right leg; A 11, one of the two larger and
    the smallest claw of the same [figs. A 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11,
    magnified]; fig. B and B 1, the upper part of the tube and door
    of a nest of _N. Eleanora_ which partially projected beyond the
    surface of the earth and was clothed with living moss. [Figs. B
    and B 1 are of the natural size.]




                               PART I.

                          HARVESTING ANTS.




PART I.

HARVESTING ANTS.


It was in May, 1869, that Mr. Bentham in his presidential address
to the Linnean Society called attention to the want of reliable
information as to the existence of such subterranean accumulations of
seeds as are popularly supposed to account for the sudden appearance
on railway cuttings, gravel from deep pits, and the like, of crops of
weeds hitherto unknown in a district.

He suggested that it might repay the trouble if some accurate
observers were to take this in hand, and investigate the matter
both by examining samples of undisturbed soil taken from various
depths,--when, if any seeds of moderate size were present and
undecomposed, it would be tolerably easy to distinguish them,--and
also by ascertaining what means of transport exist by which seeds may
be scattered over exposed surfaces, and thus explain the difficulty
without having recourse to hypothetical supplies of sound though
long-buried seeds.[1]

[Footnote 1: M. Kerner of Innspruck has lately adduced some facts
bearing on the question of the transport of seeds by the wind, having
examined the collections of animal and vegetable substances found
on the icy surfaces of glaciers and the plants growing on moraines.
Judging from the facts thus obtained, he attributes but a small
influence to this agency, as the specimens discovered belonged to
the fauna and flora of the immediate vicinity, and not one of these
specimens must needs have come from a distance. See abstract of his
paper in Gardener's Chronicle, Feb. 3, 1872, p. 143, and in 'Nature'
for June 27, 1872, p. 164.]

As I listened, the question occurred to me whether the ants, which
I had observed carrying seeds to their nests at Mentone, might not
be unconscious agents on a small scale, both in the distribution
and the subterranean storing of seeds. When at a later time I made
this suggestion to some of our leading naturalists, I learned with
considerable surprise that the unanimous opinion of our highest
modern authorities on the subject is opposed to the belief that
European ants ever do systematically collect and make provision
of seeds, and that the instances of such occurrences in tropical
climates remain as isolated though undoubted facts which it is
difficult to explain.

I was not then aware that towards the middle of last century the
ancient belief, dating from the time of Solomon, that ants habitually
show forethought and husbandry in the collection of supplies of seeds
and grain had begun to be called in question, and that our most able
observers, such as Huber, Gould, Kirby and Spence, and at the present
day Mr. Frederick Smith, had by close scrutiny of the habits of these
creatures proved that, wherever personal investigation had enabled
them to put the matter to proof, no trace of harvesting was found.[2]

[Footnote 2: I have myself on many occasions thrown seeds in the
track of the common English ants, and my experience was, up to the
past summer (1872), similar to that of the above-named naturalists,
but I have lately, by the merest chance, become acquainted with
a curious exception to this rule. It happened as follows. I was
gathering some fresh capsules of the common sweet violet in a garden
at Richmond, near London, and in pouring the seeds out of my hand
into the paper bag made to receive them, a few were spilled on the
ground. In a short time afterwards I was greatly surprised to see
some of these spilled seeds in motion, being carried by the common
black ant (_Formica nigra_) into its nest. On seeing this I hastened
to get some more fresh violet seeds, and also a quantity of seeds
taken from ant's granaries at Mentone, and scattered these where the
other seeds had lain. After watching for half an hour a few of the
violet seeds were carried in, but not one of the granary seeds was
removed, though these were examined with some curiosity. I repeated
this experiment twice afterwards on a distinct colony of ants of the
same kind and obtained exactly the same result. I opened the nest of
the former colony on the day after they had carried in the seeds, but
failed to find these or any stores of other seeds.

I am inclined to think that the ants took these seeds believing them
to be larvæ of other ants which they might eat; for fresh seeds
of violet are not very unlike the larvæ of certain ants, as, for
example, those of _Atta barbara_, figured at Plate I., Fig. E., p.
21, the semi-transparent membranous appendage partly concealing the
seed and giving it a fleshy appearance.

I think this the more likely because on two occasions the seeds which
had been carried into the nest were subsequently thrown out by the
ants, which had I believe discovered their mistake.]

However, just as the ancient writers, judging from their own
experience and from the reports of others, had erred in attributing
to ants in general the habit of seed-storing possessed by certain
species commonly found in the south, so have modern naturalists
fallen into the mistake of denying it to any of the European species.

The older authors who lived in Greece and Italy, and the mediæval
authors who drew their information in great measure from the former,
being familiar with the fact that some ants habitually collect large
supplies of seed, went so far as to assert, or to imply, that all
European ants do so; the authors of the present day, on the other
hand, generalizing too freely from their experience of ants found
near their northern homes, maintained and maintain the very reverse.

So long as Europe was taught natural history by southern writers the
belief prevailed; but no sooner did the tide begin to turn, and the
current of information to flow from north to south, than the story
became discredited.

It is interesting now to recall a few of the allusions to the
harvesting ants made by ancient authors, some of which contain
tolerably accurate accounts of what was to them a familiar sight or a
universally accepted fact.

The passages in Proverbs[3] are the following: "Go to the ant, thou
sluggard: consider her ways and be wise; which, having no guide,
overseer, or ruler, provideth her meat in the summer, and gathereth
her food in the harvest." "The ants are a people not strong, yet they
prepare their meat in the summer." Hesiod[4] speaks of the time

       "When the provident one (the ant) harvests the grain."
                      ὅτἐ τ ιδρις σωρὀυ ἁμαται.

[Footnote 3: vi. 6-8 and xxx. 25.]

[Footnote 4: Works and Days, 776.]

Horace[5] also alludes to the foresight of the ant, who is "haud
ignara ac non incauta futuri." Virgil[6] compares the Trojans
hastening their departure to harvesting ants, and the passage has
been thus rendered by Dryden:--

                "The beach is covered o'er
    With Trojan bands, that blacken all the shore:
    On every side are seen, descending down,
    Thick swarms of soldiers, loaden from the town,
    Thus, in battalia, march embodied ants,
    Fearful of winter, and of future wants,
    T' invade the corn, and to their cells convey
    The plundered forage of their yellow prey.
    The sable troops, along the narrow tracks,
    Scarce bear the weighty burden on their backs;
    Some set their shoulders to the ponderous grain;
    Some guard the spoil; some lash the lagging train;
    All ply their several tasks, and equal toil sustain."

[Footnote 5: Satires I. i. 33.]

[Footnote 6: Æneid, Bk. iv. l. 402.

    "Ac velut ingentem formicæ farris acervum
    Quum populant, hiemis memores, tectoque reponunt:
    It nigrum campis agmen, prædamque per herbas
    Convectant calle angusto; pars grandia trudunt
    Obnixæ frumenta humeris; pars agmina cogunt,
    Castigantque moras; opere omnis semita fervet."
]

Indeed, it would seem that among the people inhabiting the shores
of the Mediterranean it was almost as common to say "as provident
as an ant" as it is with us to say "as busy as a bee." Plautus[7]
introduces a slave who, when attempting to account for the rapid
disappearance of a sum of money of which he had charge, says,

                                      "Confit cito
    Quam si tu objicias formicis papaverem."

                        "It vanished in a twinkling,
    Just like poppy seed thrown to the ants."

[Footnote 7: Trinummus, Act ii. sc. 4, l. 7.]

Any one who has seen the eagerness with which certain southern ants
seize upon seeds thrown in their path will appreciate the correctness
of this simile.

Claudius Ælianus, who lived in the time of Hadrian, gives a detailed
account of the habits which he attributes to ants,[8] from which the
following is a translation: "In summer time, after harvest, while
the ears are being threshed the ants pry about in troops around the
threshing floors, leaving their homes, and going singly, in pairs, or
sometimes three together. They then select grains of wheat or barley,
and go straight home by the way they came. Some go to collect, others
to carry away the burden, and they avoid the way for one another with
great politeness and consideration, especially the unburdened for
the weight carriers. Now these excellent creatures, when they have
returned home, and stored their granaries with wheat and barley, bore
through each grain of seed in the middle; that which falls off in the
process becomes a meal for the ants, and the remainder is unfertile.
This these worthy housekeepers do, lest when the rains come the seeds
should sprout, as they would do if left entire, and thus the ants
should come to want. So we see that the ants have good share in the
gifts of nature, in this respect as well as others." Further on[9]
he gives a very interesting account of their mode of collecting and
preparing the grain, many details of which I can myself substantiate
from personal observation, though I have never seen ants actually
at work upon the ears of corn. "But when the ants start a foraging,
they follow the biggest, who take the lead as generals. And when
they come to the crops, the younger ones stand under the stalk, but
the leaders ascending gnaw through the culms, as they are called
[ὀυραγοὑς, 'the stalk ends on which the ears grow' (Lid. and Scott,
Gr. Lex.)], probably meaning that they detach the separate spikelets
of which the ears are composed], of the ears [καρπἱμων], which they
throw to the people below. These busy themselves with cutting away
the chaff and peeling off the envelopes which contain and cover the
grain. So the ants, though they need no threshing time, nor men to
winnow for them, nor an artificial draught of wind to separate corn
and chaff, yet have the food of men who both plough and sow for it."
Ælian appears also to have heard reports of the habits of ants in
tropical countries, for he says,[10] "Certainly the Indian ant is
also a wise creature.... They leave one opening at the top (of the
nest), by which they have their exits and entrances, when they come
bearing the seeds which they collect." I have never myself found
seeds bored through the centre in the way recorded above, but it is
possible that different species of ants may treat the seeds in other
ways than those observed by me; or, on the other hand, Ælian may have
mistaken the gnawing off the radicle of the seed, a process which I
shall describe from personal observation below, and imagined that the
seed itself was pierced.

[Footnote 8: Ælian, De Naturâ Animalium, ii. 25.]

[Footnote 9: Ælian, De Nat. Anim., lib. vi. chap. xliii.]

[Footnote 10: Id. lib. xvi. 15.]

Aldrovandus, writing in the sixteenth century, speaks[11] of the ants
as storing seed and of their gnawing, "illud principium seu acumen
grani, è quo germen emitti à tritico solet"--that is to say, the
radicle. But it is not clear whether Aldrovandus treats of what he
has himself seen or refers to the account given by a certain Bishop,
Simon Mariolus, who, he says "in his most pleasant and learned work,
introduces a philosopher as taking his walks abroad and examining an
ant's nest with its seed store," &c.

[Footnote 11: Aldrovandus, De Insectis, lib. v. (de Formicis).]

The lively fable of the ant and the grasshopper, as related by La
Fontaine, has done much towards familiarizing and keeping alive in
the minds of many of us the idea that ants habitually provide stores
against the winter; but we must not infer from this narration that
the witty French author had ever cared to examine for himself whether
the fable, which he borrowed from Æsop, had its foundation in fact or
not. The following translation from, the Greek original[12] bears in
a much higher degree the impress of personal and accurate observation.

[Footnote 12: For this translation and all the foregoing extracts
from ancient and mediæval authors I have to thank my brother, M. W.
Moggridge.]

Μὑρμηκες καἰ Τἑττιξ: The Ants and the Grasshopper. Once in winter
time the ants were sunning their seed-store which had been soaked
by the rains. A grasshopper saw them at this, and being famished
and ready to perish, he ran up and begged for a bit. To the ant's
question, "What were you doing in summer, idling, that you have
to beg now?" he answered, "I lived for pleasure then, piping and
pleasing travellers." "O, ho!" said they, with a grin, "dance in
winter, if you pipe in summer. Store seed for the future when you
can, and never mind playing and pleasing travellers."[13] It would
be easy to multiply instances in which the older authors allude to
this habit, but enough have been given to afford a sample of what
may easily be found repeated elsewhere, and I will now quote a few
instances which illustrate the more modern belief, utterly opposed to
that so long maintained by the ancients.

[Footnote 13: Æsopicæ Fabulæ (Tauchnitz edition), p. 92.]

Messrs. Kirby and Spence[14] discuss the matter in the following
terms:--"When we find the writers of all nations and ages unite in
affirming that, having deprived it of the power of vegetating, ants
store up grain in their nests, we feel disposed to give larger credit
to their assertions. Writers in general have taken ... (this) ... for
granted. But when observers of nature began to examine the manners
and economy of these creatures more narrowly, it was found, at least
with respect to the European species of ants, that no such hoards of
grain were made by them; and, in fact, that they had no magazines in
their nests in which provisions of any kinds were stored up."

[Footnote 14: Entomology, ed. 7 (1856), p. 313.]

They then proceed to explain how easily the white pupæ, which the
ants carry about in their jaws, may have been mistaken for grains of
wheat, and to inform us that the accurate observations of Mr. Gould,
published in 1747, were among the first which led to the correction
of this error. "However," they continue, "it may be otherwise with
exotic ants, for although during the cold of our winters they are
generally torpid and need scarcely any food, yet in warmer regions,
during the rainy seasons, when they are probably confined to their
nests, a store of provisions may be necessary for them."

The author of the article on ants in Smith's Dictionary of the Bible
says, in reference to the assertion that ants store seed, that
"observation of the habits of ants does not confirm this belief."

Latreille[15] denies it in the following emphatic terms:
"N'attribuons pas à la fourmi une prévoyance inutile: engourdie
pendant l'hiver, pourquoi formeroit elle des greniers pour cette
saison?"

[Footnote 15: Hist. Nat. des Fourmis, 1802.]

Huber again throws the weight of his great authority into the scale
against the ants, when he says,[16] "I am naturally led to speak in
this place of the manner in which ants subsist in the winter, since
we have relinquished the opinion that they amass wheat and other
grain, and that they gnaw the corn to prevent it from germinating."
He then goes on to show how the ants are frequently torpid during the
winter, and that when it happens that a few warmer days wake them up
to life, they can always find a few aphides also on the alert; for,
strange to say, the same degree of warmth which rouses the ants calls
forth the aphides also. It would appear that ants in the northern
parts of Europe feed on the honey-dew of aphides, and on animal
matter when they can get it; and up to the present time the belief
prevails among our modern naturalists that they are limited to the
same diet in all parts of Europe.

[Footnote 16: Huber, on Ants, translated by J. R. Johnson, 1820.]

It is now well known, however, that exceptions must probably be made
in tropical countries, for the observations of Lieut.-Col. Sykes[17]
and Dr. Jerdon[18] have shown that many ants in India collect grain
in large quantities, robbing the crops and plants cultivated in
gardens, and even stealing seeds put away in drawers, the inference
being that they employ them for food. The same observers have
recorded how the ants may be seen after wet weather bringing out the
grain to dry in the sun.

[Footnote 17: Lieut.-Col. Sykes, Description of New Indian Ants, in
Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond., i. 103 (1836), where a single species of
ant, which he names _Atta providens_, is described, and its habit of
harvesting recorded.]

[Footnote 18: Dr. Jerdon, Madras Journal Lit. and Sc. (1851), where
three species are stated to harvest seeds on a large scale--namely,
_Œcodoma (or Atta) providens_, _Œcodoma diffusa_, and _Atta rufa_,
all of which belong to the same section of ants as our Mentonese
harvesters, _Atta barbara_, _Atta structor_, and _Pheidole (or Atta)
megacephala_. These very interesting observations of Dr. Jerdon's, as
well as those of Lieut.-Col. Sykes, will be found in Appendix B.]

Dr. Lincecum has also given a very interesting account[19] of the
habits of the "agricultural ant" inhabiting Texas, _Myrmica (Atta)
barbata_, which not only stores the grain of a particular rice-like
grass, but is said to maintain a clean crop of this plant around its
nest, suffering no weed to appear among it, and harvesting the crop
in its proper season.

[Footnote 19: Published in the Journal of the Linnean Society of
London, vol. vi. p. 29. 1861.]

The Sauba ant (_Œcodoma cephalotes_) has been seen by Mr. Bates
plundering baskets containing mandioca meal (an impure form of
tapioca) in Brazil, and this in so wholesale a manner as shortly to
threaten the loss of the entire supply; and Dr. Delacoux records[20]
the presence in New Granada of a monstrous ant, called by the natives
_Arieros_, a word which, I am informed, is of Arabic extraction, and
means the _carrier_, which emptied an entire sack of maize belonging
to him in a single night.

[Footnote 20: Notice sur les Mœurs et les Habitudes de quelques
Espèces de Formiciens des Climats Chauds. Rev. Zool., Mai, 1848, p.
1849.]

It seems strange that while travellers have reported the seed-storing
habits of ants in far distant countries, our naturalists at home
should have not only remained unaware of its existence in Europe, but
even strenuously denied it. It is certain, however, that naturalists
and others in southern Europe are more or less aware of the fact, but
I have been unable to learn that any accurate account of the habits
of harvesting ants has hitherto been published, or that any one has
taken pains to discover what becomes of the seed so laboriously
obtained.

It is true that in the _Enciclopedia Popolare_[21] extracts are
given from the remarks made by M. Gené[22] on the subject, in which
he assumes that the fact that ants collect and carry to their nest
large supplies of grain and seed is well known, but states that he is
at a loss to conceive how they employ them, unless it may be that
they use them as materials for the construction of their galleries,
for they cannot eat such hard substances, all their food being
either liquid or of the nature of juices, "gli alimenti sono sempre
materie liquide o materie sugose. Quanto ai corpi duri e secchi che
le formiche raccolgono, io non so altrimenti riguardarli che come
materiali di costruzione." It will be understood, I think, from what
has gone before, that thus far nothing has really been ascertained as
to the exact state of the case; for though the Italian author just
quoted was aware that certain ants in the Mediterranean region do
store seed, his knowledge went no further. Nor am I aware that any
French author has published an account of this habit and its object;
and in a recent abundantly illustrated volume founded on a work by
M. Emile Blanchard, I find, on the contrary, the following very
emphatic denial of its existence:--"The curious idea which appears
to have commenced in very remote times, and to have been carried
down by tradition, and which was assisted by the results of careless
observations, concerning the habits of the ants in collecting and
storing up provisions, as it were under the influence of a wise
foresight, is evidently incorrect."[23] There was, therefore, clearly
an opening here for close observation, and this I determined to do my
best to supply.

[Footnote 21: Article Formica, vol. v. p. 143-4. (Turin, 1845).]

[Footnote 22: Memorie per servire alla Storia Naturale di alcuni
imenotteri, published at Modena, in 1842.]

[Footnote 23: The Transformations of Insects: an adaptation for
English readers of M. Emile Blanchard's Metamorphoses, Mœurs, et
Instincts des Insectes, p. 196. London. 1871.]

When I set out again from England in October, 1871, on my way to
Mentone, I had obtained an idea of some of the leading points which
needed to be cleared up, and I was greatly encouraged in my attempt
by the interest expressed in the subject by several of our leading
naturalists, among whom I may especially mention Mr. Frederick
Smith.[24]

[Footnote 24: am very greatly indebted to Mr. Smith for much kind
assistance, and especially for having named the specimens which I
collected.]

Plainly the first thing to do was to determine whether the seeds
which I had watched the ants carry to their nests were separately
stored in subterranean granaries, as they would be if the ant really
provides for the future; or whether they were merely strewed here and
there, or used as building materials.

Next I must, if possible, obtain conclusive evidence as to the use to
which the ants put the seeds thus collected; whether they eat them
or turn them to some other account. Again I must observe whether
the seed-collecting ants also search for aphides, and what other
kinds of food they obtain. Then another very interesting question
remained--namely, whether all southern ants uniformly collect seed,
and to the same extent, or whether the habit is peculiar to certain
species.

These, and many other subjects of inquiry connected with them,
readily suggested themselves to my mind, and it will now be my
endeavour to show how far I have been able to throw light upon them.

The habits recorded in the following pages refer exclusively, unless
special notice is given to the contrary, to _Atta barbara_, the
black ant represented on Plate I. We have, as far as I am aware,
only four _bonâ fide_ harvesting ants on the Riviera--namely, _Atta
barbara_ under two forms, the one wholly black the other red-headed;
_Atta structor_, a creature very similar to _barbara_, but of a
claret-brown colour; and a minute yellow ant, the large workers of
which have gigantic heads, named _Pheidole_ (or _Atta_) _megacephala_.

My renewed observations at Mentone were carried on from October,
1871, to May, 1872, and I was able during that interval to become a
frequent visitor to a warm and sheltered valley, which lay but a few
minutes' walk from the house in which I lived, and in which thirty
nests of the most active of the seed-storing ants were to be found.

Full therefore of my intention to resolve this difficulty if
possible, I set out on October 29, 1871, immediately after my return
to Mentone, to revisit this valley, where, in the previous May, I had
seen the ants busily engaged in cutting, carrying, and sorting their
harvest.

The spot in question was a rough slope of soft sandstone rock, with
accumulations of sandy soil in the hollows, covered with a sparse and
scrubby vegetation, composed of _Cistus_ (_C. salvifolius_), pot-herb
thyme, black lavender (_Lavandula stæchas_), spiny broom (_Calycotome
spinosa_), overshadowed here and there by a few scattered stone and
maritime pines, and intermixed with coarse grasses and some smaller
plants.

Cultivated lemon terraces lay on the edge of the wild ground lower
down in the valley, and at this season, as also in the late spring,
these terraces were overgrown with a rank crop of weeds, most of
which were in seed.

I had scarcely set foot on the _garrigue_, as this kind of wild
ground is called, to distinguish it from meadows or terraced land,
before I was met by a long train of ants, forming two continuous
lines, hurrying in opposite directions, the one with their mouths
full, the others with their mouths empty.

It was easy enough to find the nest to which these ants belonged, for
it was only necessary to follow the line of ants burdened with seeds,
grain, or entire capsules, which had their heads turned homewards,
and there, sure enough, at about ten yards distance, and partly
shaded by some small _Cistus_ bushes, lay the nest, to and from the
entrances of which the incessant stream of incomers and outgoers kept
flowing.

The proceedings of the ants were the same as those previously
observed in the late spring (April and May), the workers usually
seeking their harvest at some distance from the nest, and going in
search of it as far as the cultivated ground, where the crops of
weeds were more abundant and more varied.

In a few cases, however, where the terraces were too far distant,
they contented themselves with plundering the grasses, pea-flowers,
honeywort, and the other denizens of the garrigue. In one case I was
able to follow the thread-like column of workers from the nest to the
weedy terrace where the plants grew from which they were gathering
the seeds, and found that the nearly continuous double line measured
twenty-four yards. Even this gives but an inadequate idea of the
number of ants actively employed in the service of this colony, for
hundreds of them were dispersed among the weeds on the terrace, and
many were also employed in sorting the materials and in attending to
the internal economy of the nest. Still this affords some evidence
of the systematic and extensive scale on which foraging is carried on
by this ant, and of the high importance which these creatures attach
to their provision of grain.

It is not a little surprising to see that the ants bring in not
only seeds of large size and fallen grain, but also green capsules,
the torn stalks of which show that they have been freshly gathered
from the plant. The manner in which they accomplish this feat
is as follows. An ant ascends the stem of a fruiting plant, of
Shepherd's-purse (_Capsella Bursa pastoris_) let us say, and
selects a well-filled but green pod about midway up the stem, those
below being ready to shed their seeds at a touch. Then, seizing
it in its jaws, and fixing its hind legs firmly as a pivot, it
contrives to turn round and round, and so strain the fibres of the
fruit-stalk that at length they snap. It then descends the stem,
patiently backing and turning upwards again as often as the clumsy
and disproportionate burden becomes wedged between the thickly set
stalks, and joins the line of its companions on their way to the
nest. In this manner capsules of chickweed (_Alsine media_) and
entire calyces, containing the nutlets of Calaminth, are gathered;
two ants also sometimes combine their efforts, when one stations
itself near the base of the peduncle and gnaws it at the point of
greatest tension, while the other hauls upon and twists it. I have
never seen a capsule severed from its stalk by cutting alone, and
the mandibles of this ant are perhaps incompetent to perform such a
task. I have occasionally seen ants engaged in cutting the capsules
of certain plants drop them and allow their companions below to carry
them away; and this corresponds with the curious account given by
Ælian[25] of the manner in which the spikelets of corn are severed
and thrown down "to the people below," [Greek: tô dêmô tô katô] τω
δἡμω κἁτω.

[Footnote 25: Vide supra, p. 8.]

If the incoming and weight-carrying column of ants be closely
examined it will be found that though the great majority of workers
are bringing seeds in some form to the nest, a few are burdened with
other and more miscellaneous materials.

Occasionally one or two may be detected carrying a dead insect, or
crushed land-shell, the corolla of a flower, a fragment of stick, or
leaf, but I have never seen aphides brought in to the nest or visited
by this ant or by _Atta structor_.

It sometimes happens that an ant has manifestly made a bad selection,
and is told on its return that what it has brought home with much
pains is no better than rubbish, and is hustled out of the nest,
and forced to throw its burden away. In order to try whether these
creatures were not fallible like other mortals, I one day took out
with me a little packet of grey and white porcelain beads, and
scattered these in the path of a harvesting train. They had scarcely
lain a minute on the earth before one of the largest workers seized
upon a bead, and with some difficulty clipped it with its mandibles
and trotted back at a great pace to the nest. I waited for a little
while, my attention being divided between the other ants who were
vainly endeavouring to remove the beads, and the entrance down which
the worker had disappeared, and then left the spot. On my return
in an hour's time, I found the ants passing unconcernedly by and
over the beads which lay where I had strewn them in apparently
undiminished quantities; and I conclude from this that they had
found out their mistake, and had wisely returned to their accustomed
occupations.

I have often amused myself by strewing hemp and canary seed or oats,
all of which form heavy burdens for the ants, near their nests;
and it is a curious sight to watch the eagerness and determination
with which they will drag them away. It is interesting also to note
how on the following day the husks of these seeds will appear on
the rubbish-heap, or sometimes, after a shower of rain, they will
be brought out by the ants with the point of the little root (the
radicle or fibril as the case may be) gnawed off (see Figs. A, B, C,
Plate VI., p. 35).

It frequently happens that on the wild hillside the position of a
nest of _Atta barbara_ is indicated by the presence of a number
of plants growing on or round the kitchen midden, which are
properly weeds of cultivation, and strangers to the cistus- and
lavender-covered banks of the garrigue. These have sprung from
seeds accidentally dropped by the ants, and which they had obtained
from the lemon terraces. Thus when you see little patches of ground
from one to three feet long and broad, covered with such plants as
fumitory (_Fumaria_), oats (_Avena_), nettles (_Urtica membranacea_),
four species of _Veronica_, chickweed (_Alsine media_), goosefoot
(_Chenopodium_), _Rumex Bucephalephorus_, wild marigold (_Calendula
arvensis_), _Antirrhinum Orontium_, _Linaria simplex_, and _Cardamine
hirsuta_, you may confidently expect to find a colony of these ants
close at hand.

[Illustration: _Plate I._]

These plants are sometimes found along the sides of miniature
gullies and crevices in the rock, where they have been washed by
little runlets of water formed in seasons of heavy rain, and thus
these interloping plants are occasionally dispersed and brought into
competition with the rightful occupiers of the ground.

_Atta structor_ and _A. barbara_ do not employ any materials in the
construction of their nest, simply excavating it out of the earth
itself, or occasionally out of the sandy rock, and the large mounds,
in great part composed of vegetable matter, which may frequently
be found at the entrances of their nests, are nothing more than
the rubbish heaps and kitchen middens of each establishment. These
consist in part of the earth pellets and grains of gravel which
the ants bring out from their nest when forming the subterranean
galleries, but principally of plant-refuse such as the chaff of
grasses, empty capsules, gnawed seed-coats, and the like, which
would occupy much space if left inside the nest (see Plate I., Fig.
A.). While an army of workers are employed in seeking and bringing
in supplies, others are busy sorting the materials thus obtained,
stripping off all the useless envelopes of seed or grain, and
carrying them out to throw away. Thanks to the unwearied activity
with which this divided labour is carried on the kitchen middens
speedily rise in the harvest season, and in places where they are not
exposed to the action of wind and rain, often acquire a considerable
size, so much so that sometimes, if collected, one alone might fill a
quart tankard.

It was the sight of such a refuse mound, and an examination of the
materials which composed it,--many of which show that they were
once parts of seeds, &c., the albuminous contents of which had
been extracted through holes gnawed in the side,--that gave me the
conviction that large stores of seed must lie hidden below in the
nest; for if it were true, as some have suggested, that the ants
employ the grain and seeds which they collect as materials for the
construction of their nest, they would certainly not reject such
parts as the chaff of grasses and the like, which are admirably
suited for the purpose, and are actually used for this end by other
species of ants.

It was therefore with the greatest confidence as to the result that I
opened the nests of _Atta barbara_ in search of granaries and seeds.
My first attempt was made upon a nest lying in a hollow where there
was a rather deep bed of soil, and the galleries extended so far on
either side and in a downward direction that, though I removed enough
soil to fill a wheelbarrow, I failed to reach the arcana of the nest,
and saw neither chambers nor granaries.

Yet I frequently encountered workers carrying seeds downwards along
the subterranean passages. I then selected a nest where the coarse
and hard rock lay much nearer to the surface, barring their downward
course, and compelling the ants to extend their nest in a horizontal
direction.

Here, almost at the first stroke, I came upon large masses of seeds
carefully stored in chambers prepared in the soil. Some of these
lay in long subcylindrical galleries, and, owing to the presence in
large quantities of the black shining seeds of amaranth (_Amaranthus
Blitum_, &c.), looked like trains of gunpowder laid ready for
blasting. Fig. A, Plate II. represents a trowelful of earth taken
from this nest, and lifted with care so as to leave the seeds almost
_in situ_. Others were massed together in horizontal chambers, having
a concave roof and a flat and carefully prepared floor.

[Illustration: _Plate II._]

[Illustration: _Plate III._]

The texture of the floor usually differs markedly from that of the
surrounding soil, and the fine grains of silex and mica which are
selected for its construction are more or less cemented together, so
that the floor will sometimes part, when dry, from the soil about it,
as caked and dry mud separates from a gravel path (see Plate III.).

On carefully examining a quantity of the seeds, grain, and minute
dry fruits taken from the granaries, I found that they had been
gathered from the following plants: fumitory (_Fumaria Capreolata_,
&c.), amaranth (_Amaranthus Blitum_, &c.), _Setaria_, and three other
species of grasses, honeywort (_Alyssum maritimum_), _Veronica_, and
from four unrecognised species, one of which was a pea-flower. There
were therefore in this nest seeds, &c., which had been taken from
more than twelve distinct species of plants, belonging to at least
seven separate families. The granaries lay from an inch and a half to
six inches below the surface and were all horizontal. They were of
various sizes and shapes, the average granary being about as large as
a gentleman's gold watch.

I was greatly surprised to find that the seeds, though quite moist,
showed no trace of germination, and this was the more astonishing as
the self-sown seeds of the same kinds as those detected here, such
as fumitory for instance, were then coming up abundantly in gardens
and on terraces. The seeds of _Odontites lutea_ afford a curious test
of the presence of moisture in the granaries, and it will usually
be found that, when they are recently taken out of the nest, they
are of a greenish colour and semi-transparent horn-like texture,
which changes on exposure to the air to a chalky white and opaque
appearance, due to the drying of the coat of the seed.

The fact of the sound condition of the seeds in these granaries
seemed to me so very strange and difficult to explain that I
determined to pay special attention to the subject, and with this
view collected and carefully examined large quantities of the grain
and seeds taken at different times from the stores of twenty-one
distinct nests, the first of which was opened on October 29th, and
the last on May 5th. In these twenty-one nests out of the thousands
of seeds taken I only found twenty-seven in seven nests which showed
trace of germination, and of these eleven had been mutilated in such
a way as to arrest their growth. The sprouting seeds were found in
the months from November to February, while in the nests opened in
October, March, April, and May, no sprouted seeds were discovered,
though these latter months are certainly highly favourable to
germination. It is therefore extremely rare to find other than sound
and intact seeds in the granaries, and we must conclude that the ants
exercise some mysterious power over them which checks the tendency to
germinate.

Apparently it is not that moisture or warmth or the influence of
atmospheric air is denied to the seeds, for we find them in damp
soil, in genial weather, and often at but a trifling distance below
the surface of the ground; and I have proved that the vitality of
the seeds is not affected by raising crops of young plants, such as
fumitory, pellitory, _Polygonum aviculare_, and grasses, from seeds
taken out of granaries.[26]

[Footnote 26: This experiment was tried by me on two occasions,
in the former case the seeds were taken from a granary about four
inches below the surface of the ground, on November 10th, and sowed
two days afterwards, and several of these were up on Dec. 1st. The
second trial was made on seeds found at only one and a half inch
below the surface, on Dec. 29th, 1871; these were sowed in England on
June 18th, 1872, and the young plants made their appearance in large
numbers ten days afterwards.]

I have frequently remarked that it is the seeds last collected before
a fall of rain which are brought out in a sprouting condition from
the nest; for I have observed in cases where I had recently scattered
seeds near wild nests, that it is these which are carried out from
the nest and placed to dry after a wet night; and so in the case of a
nest which I kept in captivity, when a variety of different seeds had
been successively supplied to the ants, it was the cabbage, lettuce,
and chicory seeds, given the day before the nest was watered, that
reappeared after having been carried below, and not the hemp, canary,
and mixed seeds of wild plants previously strewed on the nest. It
seems possible that the process, whatever it may be, to which the
ants subject the seeds which are to remain dormant may require some
time, and the construction of the granary chambers is doubtless a
long affair, so that when unusually large supplies of grain, &c.,
are brought in by the workers some part of them may not find the
necessary accommodation and attention. When the seeds do germinate
in the nests, and it is my belief that they are usually softened
and made to sprout before they are consumed by the ants, it is very
curious to see how the growth is checked in its earliest stage,
and how, after the radicle or fibril--the first growing root of
dicotyledonous and monocotyledonous seeds--has been gnawed off, they
are brought out from the nest and placed in the sun to dry, and then,
after a sufficient exposure, carried below into the nest.

The seeds are thus in effect malted, the starch being changed into
sugar, and I have myself witnessed the avidity with which the
contents of seeds thus treated are devoured by the ants.

Figs. A, B, C, in Plate VI., p. 35, illustrate the manner in which
the ants mutilate the germinating seeds and check their growth.
Thus, at Fig. C 2 of Plate VI. a sprouting but uninjured canary seed
(_Phalaris canariensis_) is drawn, magnified, and at Figs. C and C
1 the same of the natural size and magnified, after the ants have
gnawed its fibril (fib.), which in this case pierces the undeveloped
radicle (rad.). Fig. A 2 represents a sprouting hemp-seed,
magnified,[27] and Figs. A, A 1, the same of the natural size and
magnified, mutilated, the tip of the radicle being removed.

[Footnote 27: Properly a nut, for it comprises the seed and the
enveloping coat of the ovary. The canary seed also, spoken of above,
is a grain containing a seed.]

At Figs. B, B 1, B 2, the same process is shown in the case of a
small wild pea.

It is, however, certain that though a few individual seeds may sprout
in the nests from time to time either with or without the concurrence
of the ants, the great mass remain for many weeks, or even months,
quite intact, neither decaying nor germinating, whereas every one
knows that if a quantity of seeds are placed in the soil in a moist
and warm place, all the seeds that are of one kind will almost
simultaneously begin to grow after the lapse of a fixed interval.

Now if this took place in an ant's nest, the provisions would
have to be rapidly consumed at stated periods and to be frequently
renewed; but this is not the case. This is easily shown by an
examination of the seeds contained in the nests in April or May, many
of which will prove to belong to plants which fruit in the autumn and
are not to be found later than November. Thus, for example, on May
5th at Cannes, I discovered nutlets of _Cynoglossum pictum_, which
can scarcely have been collected later than the preceding October
or November. Besides, during the time from the middle of January to
the middle of March, scarcely a seed is collected under ordinary
circumstances, there being extremely few wild plants in fruit at that
season, and yet the granaries will be found well filled if a nest is
opened at the end of this period.

A knowledge of the fact that ants in warm climates accumulate large
and very varied stores of seeds retaining their power of germination,
might at times be of service to travellers, by enabling them to
obtain, by a stroke or two of the spade, an interesting collection
of the seeds and the seed-like fruits of the country, when time
and opportunity failed for obtaining them in a more satisfactory
manner. The following list of plants, the grain, seeds, and small dry
fruits of which I have found in the subterranean granaries of _Atta
structor_ and _A. barbara_, especially the latter, shows that the
ants probably collect almost indiscriminately from any fruiting plant
that falls in their way.

Fumitory (_Fumaria_, three species), honeywort (_Alyssum maritimum_),
narrow-leaved sun rose (_Fumaria viscida_ and _F. Spachii_),
_Oxalis corniculata_, _Silene_, _Linum gallicum_, mallow (_Lavatera
cretica_?), medick (_Medicago_), wild lentil (_Ervum_), spiny
broom (_Cytisus spinosus_), _Valerianella carinata_, _Centaurea
aspera_, _Odontites lutea_, _Calamintha Nepeta_, _Polygonum
convolvulus_ and _P. aviculare_, amaranth (_Amaranthus Blitum_ and
_patulus_), pellitory (_Parietaria_), _Euphorbia_, pine (_Pinus_),
wild sarsaparilla (_Smilax aspera_), _Setaria verticillata_ and
_S. italica_, _Andropogon Ischæmum_, and of eight other plants of
which I do not recognise the seeds. This list, comprising plants
belonging to eighteen distinct families, might be greatly prolonged
if I were to add to it the names of the seeds which I have seen the
ants carry towards their nests, but have not actually detected in
the granaries. Thus I have seen trains of ants burdened with the
long-beaked, spirally-twisted fruits of crane's bill (_Erodium_),
and, as above mentioned, with capsules of chickweed (_Alsine media_)
and shepherd's-purse (_Capsella Bursa pastoris_), with whole orange
pips, and even haricot beans, seeds of the New Zealand veronica
(_V. Andersonii_), of _Silene pseudoatocion_, and many other garden
plants, also with nutlets of the plane tree and seeds of the cypress.

Pliny mentions[28] incidentally having watched the ants carrying away
cypress seeds, and comments upon the fact that so small a creature
should be able to interfere with the growth of such a noble tree.

[Footnote 28: Pliny, Nat. Hist., xvii. 14, 3.]

I have little doubt that the seed stores of the ants in botanic and
other gardens, where rare plants are cultivated in southern Europe
and in warm climates generally, contain samples taken from the fruits
of a great many of the rarer and more interesting species as well as
of the weeds and native plants. Indeed I have been told that this is
the case by my friend Dr. Bornet, who complains of the depredations
committed by the ants in the gardens of the Villa Thuret, at Antibes.
They go so far as to plunder the seed bags which are hung from the
branches of the trees and shrubs, unless these are securely closed
and tied with string; they carry off wholesale the grass and anemone
seeds,[29] which are scattered when the lawns are resown; and Dr.
Bornet has seen the seeds of _Acacia retinoides_ lie heaped up by the
handful at the entrances of their nests, and disappear below after a
few hours.

[Footnote 29: Properly grass grain and anemone achenes.]

M. Germain de St. Pierre has observed similar facts at Hyères, where
he has detected large stores of cereals in the granaries of the ants,
and considers that the robberies committed by these creatures are
sufficient in extent to cause a serious loss to cultivators.

It is difficult to estimate the amount of seed stored in a single
nest by a colony of ants both on account of the extent of these
nests, and because of the number of seeds which are always lost in
digging. The nests themselves also vary greatly in size. Perhaps I
shall not be very far from the mark however, if I conjecture that
average-sized nests contain during the winter months about half a
pint of seeds.

_Atta structor_ is more frequently found near houses and in gardens
than _A. barbara_, the latter usually living on wild ground adjoining
cultivation. There was a flourishing colony of _structor_ in the main
street of Mentone, cleverly placed at the lintel of the door of a
corn chandler's store, where they were ever on the look out for stray
grains of oats and wheat, which might chance to fall from the sacks.
Another nest, in a different part of the town, got its principal
subsistence from the grains of canary seed, which were scattered by
the birds occupying a cage hanging outside a shop window at a little
distance.

[Illustration: Vertical section of an ant's nest. The horizontal
lines represent inches of depth.]

The granaries of _A. structor_ are arranged in the same way as those
of _A. barbara_, and may, in like manner, be found stored with seeds,
and lying at depths below the surface, varying from one to twenty
inches.

[Illustration: Plate IV.]

A diagram is given in the preceding woodcut of a vertical section of
a nest of _barbara_ lying in soil sixteen inches deep, the granaries
being at 1-1/2, 2, 4, 6, 9, and 12-1/2 inches, as determined by
actual measurement on the spot.

In some cases, and especially where the soil is shallow, the
galleries and granaries are much crowded together, as is shown in
Plate IV., which represents a small mass of earth, pierced by the
roots of plants, taken out of a nest of _barbara_, lying at two
inches below the surface. When first opened all these granaries were
filled with seeds.

The shape of the granary chambers varies considerably, as may be
seen by reference to the drawing of three floors given in Plate
III., p. 23, and that shown diagrammatically in the woodcut on next
page, where the white space represents the granary floor, and the
dark circular spot in the centre, the aperture of a gallery leading
downwards.

I once had an opportunity of seeing a large portion of a nest of
the red-headed variety of _barbara_ laid bare by a cutting recently
made through a bank at Cannes in digging the foundations of a house,
which exposed a very extensive and complicated series of galleries
and granaries. The lowest point at which I detected the workings of
the ants was at twenty inches below the surface of the ground, and
here granaries containing seeds in abundance were present, and the
galleries and granaries extended over a space measuring 5ft. 9in.
in a horizontal direction. In two cases I have found nests of _Atta
barbara_ at Mentone which were carried far into the living rock
in places where it happened to be of an even grain, and not gritty
or pebbly as it frequently is. It was quite by chance that I first
discovered this very interesting fact, having tracked a train of
seed-bearing workers to a part of the sandstone rock where steps had
quite recently been hacked out leading to some terraces.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: _Plate V._]

I soon saw that the ants entered and came out from three or four
small passages in the cleft surface of the rock, and that their nest
actually lay in the sandstone itself. Having contrived to wedge off
several large flakes of the rock, which was soft in most places and
might be scooped out with a strong knife, I discovered that though
some of the passages of the ants followed the lines of cleavage and
the cracks made by the fine wiry fibres of the bushes growing on the
surface, others were frequently made in the form of tubular tunnels
through the living rock. Without the aid of hammer and chisel it was
not possible to follow the galleries and to secure specimens of the
mined rock; but on the next day (Dec. 7th) I returned armed with
tools, and with the assistance of a friend[30] quarried out a portion
of the nest, tracing it down eventually to twenty-three inches below
the surface of the rock in a vertical, and to about sixteen inches
away from the surface in a horizontal direction.

[Footnote 30: I take this opportunity of expressing my thanks to Mr.
Robert Lightbody for help on this and other occasions.]

At one point where the rock was almost entirely solid and without
flaw or crevice, and where it was clear that the passages were
entirely the work of the ants, we measured a tunnel by worming
a straw down it, and found it to be ten inches in length. We
subsequently traced this tunnel or rock gallery down until it
communicated with a chamber filled with winged ants and seeds of
several kinds. This granary was horizontal, and merely an enlargement
of an ordinary gallery of a compressed spindle-shape, flattened from
above downwards, measuring as nearly as I could estimate three inches
in length, by a trifle less than an inch in breadth, and half an
inch in height. The walls were tolerably smooth, but not prepared or
glazed in the way that certain small terminal cells which I shall
shortly describe were. The surfaces, however, had a very different
appearance to that of the surrounding sandstone, being of a darker
and brownish colour, and seeming to be coated with some kind of
dressing or cement.

One of these tunnels at first took a horizontal course for two and a
half inches, then descended vertically for an inch and a half to a
point where it made two horizontal branches, and from these latter
several other vertical galleries descended, two of which we were able
to trace until they expanded into a cluster of small pear-shaped
cells, the walls of which were quite smooth and very carefully laid
with plates of mica and cement. I was able to draw this on the spot,
Fig. A, Plate V., while Mr. Lightbody worked it out piecemeal with
hammer and chisel. It was unfortunately impossible to secure more
than very imperfect fragments as specimens. These terminal cells
were empty when we came to them, but it is quite possible that the
ants may have conveyed away larvæ or winged ants from them, having
received abundant notice of the coming danger from the continued
jarring of the chisel-work.

One entrance to this nest lay in a small accumulation of soil in a
hollow of the rock, and it was at this point that the refuse from
the nest was cast out. Indeed, had it not been for the accidental
circumstance of my having traced the ants to the newly hewn step in
the sandstone, I might never have discovered the fact that the nests
are sometimes carried deep into the living rock.

[Illustration: _Plate VI._]

With this to guide me, however, I succeeded in finding a second nest
of the same kind, and here I was able to secure better specimens
of the tunnels for drawing (Figs. B, B 1, Plate V., p. 33). These
drawings may be taken as representing also the size and shape of the
tunnels in the former nest, which were for the most part like these,
beautifully cylindrical, as is shown in the front view of the tunnel
at B 1. In one nest of _barbara_ I found a curious hollow spherical
dome, about an inch in diameter, the walls of which were constructed
of hardened earth about two lines thick, and having a large circular
aperture at the top and a very small one below (Figs. D and D 1,
Plate VI.). This dome was imbedded below in earth which adhered to
it, but it was otherwise easily separable from the soil; its inner
walls were smoothed with great nicety.

It has been suggested to me that this spherical chamber was
originally the work of a scarabæus, which had chanced to bury the
ball containing its eggs close to the nest of the ants, and that
the latter had appropriated it after the departure of the beetle
grubs. This may perhaps have been the case, but the dome was rather
larger than the ball usually formed by the scarab beetle, and I have
never seen one of these balls surrounded by a hardened case. The
chamber thus constructed was employed as a granary, and filled, as
well as the adjacent passages, with the grain of a grass (_Tragus
racemosus_), still enclosed in the husks, among which I detected
several ants at work, and also some minute white semi-transparent
creatures, like spring-tails (_Podurus_), which abound in these ants'
nests. Besides this spring-tail it is common to find in the galleries
and granaries of _Atta structor_ and _A. barbara_, certain silky
yellowish-white "silver fish" (_Lepisma_), a small white woodlouse
which does not roll itself into a ball, and at times the larvæ of an
elater beetle. I have observed on more than one occasion that when
in digging into an ant's nest I have thrown out an elater larva,
the ants would cluster round it and direct it towards some small
opening in the soil, which it would quickly enlarge and disappear
down. At other times, however, the ants would take no notice of
the elater, and it is my belief that the attentions paid to it on
former occasions were purely selfish, and that they intended to avail
themselves of the tunnel thus made down into the soil, with a view of
reopening communications with the galleries and granaries concealed
below, the approaches to which had been covered up. I have frequently
watched the ants make use of these passages mined by the elater on
these occasions.

At one time I suspected that the elater larvæ might consume the
seeds stored by the ants, and I therefore confined some of them in a
tumblerful of earth and seeds; but at the end of three weeks, though
the larvæ were strong and healthy-looking, I could not detect that
any of the seeds had been touched, and even those which had sprouted
remained uninjured. I have searched in vain for the beetles and
staphylinidæ which are known to inhabit certain ant's nests. In one
nest I found (on Dec. 28) a quantity of small spherical, egg-like
galls, slightly larger than but resembling the fruit of _Fumaria
capreolata_, spotted with pink-brown on a yellowish or greyish
ground. There was a dark spot at the point at which the mature insect
would emerge, and one did escape from the egg-like cocoon while I
was watching, and proved to be a _Cynips_ of very small size, but
furnished with a terrible dart for puncturing its prey.

It seems difficult to understand how it comes that these galls are
systematically placed among the seeds, for it was evidently no chance
occurrence, and I can only conjecture that the worker ants may have
brought them in and stored them under the impression that they were
really seeds! Even ants make mistakes, and of this I have given
an example above (p. 19). Though I have frequently found colonies
of several distinct species of ants inhabiting nests made in the
earth traversed by the widespread galleries of _Atta structor_ and
_barbara_, I have never detected any intermixture of species in the
chambers of a nest,[31] and but rarely found even the galleries and
entrance used in common by more than one species. On one occasion
when opening a nest of _structor_ I cut through a colony of the tiny,
large-headed, yellow ant _Pheidole megacephala_, lying in the midst
of, though distinct from, the former. When, however, it chanced that
one of the _structors_ fell from the crumbling earth into the midst
of the _Pheidoles_, it was curious to see how fiercely it would
be attacked, and with what terrified speed it would scamper off,
without attempting any resistance, and often carrying two or three
_Pheidoles_ hanging on to its legs.

[Footnote 31: Except in a few cases where I have seen one or two
_structors_ in nests of _barbara_ and _vice versâ_, and in the
curious instance to be mentioned below, where one colony consisted
of nearly equal parts of _structor_, _barbara_, and the red-headed
variety of _barbara_.]

Accidentally in this way battles do sometimes take place between
ants of different species; but by far the most savage and prolonged
contests which I have witnessed were those in which the combatants
belong to two different colonies of the same species.

_Atta barbara_, _Formica cruentata_, _F. erratica_, and especially
_Myrmica cæspitum_ may sometimes be seen fighting in this desperate
fashion. Rival colonies of _Myrmica cæspitum_ often gather for the
battle into dense masses three or four inches deep, and the place of
conflict will be seen on the following day strewn with the dead, and
this though the majority of the slain are carried off for food by the
victors.

But the most singular contests are those which are waged for seeds
by _A. barbara_, when one colony plunders the stores of an adjacent
nest belonging to the same species, the weaker nest making prolonged
though, for the most part, inefficient attempts to recover their
property.

In the case of the other species of ant which I have watched
fighting, the strife would last but a short time--a few hours or a
day--but _A. barbara_ will carry on the battle day after day and week
after week. I was able to devote a good deal of time to watching
the progress of a predatory war of this kind, waged by one nest of
_barbara_ against another, and which lasted for forty-six days, from
Jan. 18 to March 4!

I cannot of course declare positively that no cessation of
hostilities may have taken place during the time, but I can affirm
that whenever I visited the spot, and I did so on twelve days, or
as nearly as possible, twice a week, the scene was one of war and
spoliation such as that which I shall now describe.

An active train of ants, nearly resembling an ordinary harvesting
train, led from the entrance of one nest to that of another lower
down the slope, and fifteen feet distant; but on closer examination
it appeared that though the great mass of seed-bearers were
travelling towards the upper nest, some few were going in the
opposite direction and making for the lower. Besides this, at
intervals, combats might be seen taking place, one ant seizing the
free end of a seed carried by another, and endeavouring to wrench it
away, and then frequently, as neither would let go, the stronger ant
would drag seed and opponent towards its nest. At times other ants
would interfere and seize one of the combatants and endeavour to drag
it away, this often resulting in terrible mutilations, and especially
in the loss of the abdomen, which would be torn off while the jaws
of the victim retained their indomitable bull-dog grip upon the
seed. Then the victor might be seen dragging away his prize, while
its adversary, though now little more than a head and legs, offered
a vigorous though of course ineffectual resistance. I frequently
observed that the ants during these conflicts would endeavour to
seize one another's antennæ, and that if this were effected, the ant
thus assaulted would instantly release his hold, whether of seed or
adversary, and appear utterly discomfited. No doubt the antennæ are
their most sensitive parts, and injuries inflicted on these organs
cause the greatest pain.

It was not until I had watched this scene for some days that I
apprehended its true meaning, and discovered that the ants of the
upper nest were robbing the granaries of the lower, while the latter
tried to recover the stolen seeds both by fighting for them and by
stealing seeds in their turn from the nest of their oppressors.
The thieves, however, were evidently the stronger, and streams of
ants laden with seeds arrived safely at the upper nest, while close
observation showed that very few seeds were successfully carried on
the reverse journey into the lower and plundered nest.

Thus when I fixed my attention on one of these robbed ants
surreptitiously making its exit with the seed from the thieves' nest,
and having overcome the opposition and dangers met with on its way,
reaching after a journey which took six minutes to accomplish, the
entrance to its own home, I saw that it was violently deprived of its
burden by a guard of ants stationed there apparently for the purpose,
one of whom instantly started off and carried the seed all the way
back again to the upper nest.

This I saw repeated several times.

After March 4 I never saw any acts of hostility between these nests,
though the robbed nest was not abandoned. In another case of the
same kind, however, where the struggle lasted thirty-one days, the
robbed nest was at length completely abandoned, and on opening it I
found all the granaries empty with one single exception, and this
one was pierced by the matted roots of grasses and other plants,
and must therefore have been long neglected by the ants. Strangely
enough, not one of the seeds in this deserted granary showed traces
of germination.

No doubt some very pressing need is the cause of these systematic
raids in search of accumulations of seeds, and there can be little
doubt that the requirements of distinct colonies of ants of the same
species are often different even at the same season and date. Thus
these warring colonies of ants were active on many days when the
majority of the nests were completely closed; and I have even seen
these robbers staggering along, enfeebled by the cold, and in wind
and rain, when all other ants were safe below ground. It may be that
unusual exertions are necessitated by some exceptional demands made
by the condition of the larvæ of the winged male and female ants, and
I have observed that these latter appear at very various periods.
Thus I have seen winged males and females in the nests of _barbara_
on November 10, December 6, February 2, and March 10; and in those of
_structor_ on February 23, 29, March 13, and April 6.

Though _structor_ and _barbara_ make seed collecting the business
of their lives, they will, at least in times of scarcity, eagerly
devour animal food if it happen to fall in their way, and in the
harvesting trains a few ants may occasionally be seen carrying small
dead insects and the like. Once I threw a dead grasshopper down close
to a nest of _barbara_; it was immediately seized upon, and--after
strenuous efforts had been made to dismember it above ground, some
ants straining back the legs and wings, while others rushed in to
gnaw at the muscles where the tension was greatest,--carried down
below. On the following morning the wings of the grasshopper were to
be seen on the rubbish heap in front of the nest. Dead house-flies
and the larvæ of bees or wasps were at times readily devoured by
my captive ants (_barbara_). I have also seen large numbers of
_structors_ engaged in picking the bones of a dead lizard, and
was once a witness of the following singular contest between a
soft-bodied, smooth, greyish caterpillar, exactly an inch in length,
and two medium-sized _barbara_ ants. The ants were mere pigmies in
comparison of their prey, for as such I believe they regarded the
caterpillar, but they gripped its soft body with set mandibles,
showing the most savage determination not to loose their hold.

When I first detected the group the war was being waged in a tuft
of grass over one of the entrances to the ants' nest, and the
caterpillar was striding along the leaves, or thrusting itself
between the culms in the hope to shake off or brush away its little
persecutors. From time to time the caterpillar would turn viciously
round and endeavour to pluck away its assailants, but though it
actually succeeded in stripping off by means of its forelegs and
mouth five of the six legs of one of the ants which was within its
reach, they never once released their hold.

At length a chance movement of mine shook the grass leaf on which
they were, and ants and caterpillar rolled together down a steep and
rocky slope to about four feet distant. They tumbled over and over
several times, but still the ants gripped their prey as firmly as
ever.

The last endeavour of the giant victim was to rub off the ants by
burrowing into the soil, but on uncovering its retreat, I saw that
their positions were still the same. After watching this struggle for
twenty minutes, time failed me, and I returned home, carrying with
me, however, the combatants; and when on my return I opened the box
in which they were imprisoned, these bull-dog ants were clinging with
mandibles locked as firmly as ever, and now as I write, in death they
are clinging still, drowned in a sea of spirits of wine.

During the winter and spring I kept two colonies of _barbara_ captive
in the house, placed in separate glass jars, each of which might
perhaps hold half a gallon. The former of these colonies was taken on
December 18; but neither the queen ant nor larvæ were found, though
there probably were larvæ in some unexplored part of the nest, and
the ants were always restless and miserable, unceasingly trying to
escape, and dying in large numbers.

On February 12 I found that all these ants, though abundantly
supplied with seeds and all other kinds of food, were dead. Two other
colonies of ants, however, which had been taken in a torpid state
in the masses of earth which formed part of the original nest, were
alive and well, though still torpid.

The second captive colony, taken on December 28, with the wingless
queen ant and quantities of larvæ, formed a strong contrast with the
previous one. Here the ants at once set to work upon the construction
of galleries and safety places for the larvæ below the even surface
of garden mould on which I had placed them within the jar; for in
this case I did not attempt to preserve any portion of their own
nest. This was done at 3.30 P.M., and by 9 that evening I found the
ants most busily at work, having in less than six hours excavated
eight deep orifices leading to galleries below, and surrounded these
orifices by crater-like heaps, made of the earth pellets which they
had thrown out. I have observed somewhat similar structures raised
by _barbara_ after the nests have been closed on account of rain,
and _structor_ frequently raises still more elaborate and distinct
craters, such as those represented at Fig. B, Plate II., p. 22
(reduced one-half).

On the following morning the openings were ten in number, and the
greatly increased heaps of excavated earth showed that they must
probably have been at work all night. The amount of work done in this
short time was truly surprising, for it must be remembered that,
eighteen hours before, the earth presented a perfectly level surface,
and the larvæ and ants, now housed below, found themselves prisoners
in a strange place, bounded by glass walls, and with no exit possible.

It seems to me that the ants displayed extraordinary intelligence
in having thus at a moment's notice devised a plan by which the
superabundant number of workers could be employed at one time without
coming in one another's way. The soil contained in the jar was of
course less than a tenth part of that comprised within the limits of
an ordinary nest, while the number of workers was probably more than
a third of the total number belonging to the colony. If therefore
but one or two entrances had been pierced in the soil, the workers
would have been for ever running against one another, and a great
number could never have got below to help in the all-important
task of preparing passages and chambers for the accommodation of
the larvæ. These numerous and funnel-shaped entrances admitted of
the simultaneous descent and ascent of large numbers of ants, and
the work progressed with proportionate rapidity. After a few days
only three entrances, and eventually only one remained open. Yet
for weeks this active work went on, and the ants brought up such
quantities of earth from below that it became difficult to prevent
them from choking up the bottle containing their water, which they
repeatedly buried up to the neck. On January 10 the surface of the
earth was raised from an inch and a half at its lowest, to three
inches at its highest point above its original level, and this bulk
of excavated earth represented the amount of space contained in
their galleries and chambers constructed below. It was not, however,
until nineteen days after their capture that the ants began to form
systematic trains to carry down the seeds which I placed for them
on the surface, and I suppose that they had required this time for
the construction and consolidation of the granary chambers. From
this time forward the ants came out repeatedly in greater or less
force to gather in the various seeds with which I supplied them.
Indeed, throughout the whole of their captivity they seemed to be
perfectly contented with their lot and free from disease, remarkably
few ants dying or appearing feeble, and as far as the limited space
would permit they reproduced most of the habits which I had noted as
belonging to them in a wild state, such as the formation of a rubbish
heap; bringing out refuse materials, gnawed and empty seed-coats, the
ends of radicles, and root fibres which had penetrated their nest,
and laying sprouted seeds in the air to dry after having gnawed off
the radicle in order to arrest their growth.

I was also in this way able to see for myself much that I otherwise
could not have seen. Thus I was able to watch the operation of
removing roots which had pierced through their galleries, belonging
to seedling plants growing on the surface, and which was performed
by two ants, one pulling at the free end of the root, and the other
gnawing at its fibres where the strain was greatest, until at length
it gave way. Again the habit of throwing sick and apparently dead
ants into the water, the object of which was in part, I imagine,
to be rid of them, and partly perhaps with a view to effecting a
possible cure, for I have seen one ant carry another down the twig
which formed their path to the surface of the water, and, after
dipping it in for a minute, carry it laboriously up again, and lay it
in the sun to dry and recover; thirdly, the stripping off the coats
and husks of seed and grain swelling and on the point of sprouting,
previous to eating it; and finally, the actual eating of the contents
of the seed.

Most of these operations are usually performed below ground, and
even in my captive nest it was but rarely that I could get a glimpse
of their subterranean life, as they avoided the glass as much as
possible, though it was carefully covered with flannel and black
paper; and it was only by having the nest constantly before me on my
table, and thus becoming a witness of their operations day and night
during four months, that I detected them in positions which permitted
me to watch these actions of theirs.

The ants were in the habit of coming out in numbers of an evening
to enjoy the warmth and light of my lamp, and it was on one of
these occasions that I first observed them in the act of eating.
I perceived that in the midst of the black mass of ants gathered
together on the side of the glass jar one was holding up a white
roundish mass about as big as a large pin's head. Having turned a
stream of bright light passed through a condenser on this group, and
being permitted by the ants to make free use of my pocket lens, I was
able to see the details with great precision. The white mass appeared
to be the floury portion of a grain of millet, and I could see that
two or three ants at a time would scrape off minute particles with
their toothed mandibles, and take them into their mouths, repeating
the operation many times, before giving place to other ants, and
often returning again. It certainly appeared to be a _bonâ fide_
meal that they were making, and not merely an act performed for the
benefit of the larvæ, as when they detach crumbs from a piece of
bread and carry them below into the nest. However, I must own that,
though I subsequently dissected ants taken in this act, which I
suppose to be that of eating, I was unable by the use of the iodine
test to detect starch grains in their stomachs.

Still it seems quite possible that this failure may have been due to
my not having allowed the ants sufficient time to swallow their food,
as I killed them almost immediately after disturbing them at their
meal.

After having twice observed the ants eating as above described, I
made some experiments in feeding them myself.

They immediately seized and set to work upon a minute ball of flour
which I cut out from the centre of a grain of millet, taken from a
heap in front of a nest of _A. structor_, which had begun to sprout
and been deprived of its radicle and dried. A similar ball taken
from a sprouting grain of millet, but the growth of which had not
been arrested, was also partially eaten; but the hard, dry flour
taken from a grain of the same in its natural state, not moistened,
was at once rejected and thrown on the rubbish heap. The fat, oily
seed leaves of the hemp, however, were eagerly taken, though not
softened by water, their peculiar texture allowing the ants to
scrape off particles, as in the case of the ball of flour of the
sprouted millet. Under ordinary circumstances the hard shell of
the hemp-seed, and the coats of most other small fruits, grain, and
seeds, would prevent the ants from getting at the contents while
dry, but in the earliest stage of sprouting the shell parts of
itself, allowing the radicle to protrude, and then they find their
opportunity. (See Figs. A, A 2, Plate VI., p. 35.)

It has always been supposed that ants, from the delicate nature of
their mouth organs, were only able to lap up liquids or to swallow
very soft animal tissues, and one of the great difficulties in the
way of admitting that they might collect seeds for food, lay in the
apparent impossibility of their eating such hard substances. But
it has generally been overlooked that not only are all seeds soft
when moistened with water and ready to grow, but also that there are
certain kinds of seeds the contents of which are naturally soft.

The most important organs in an ant's mouth are shown in Fig. D 2,
and D 3, in Plate I., p. 21. D 3 represents one of the horny, toothed
mandibles, which serve admirably for scraping off particles of flour
from the seeds. Within these are the parts shown at D 2, where the
outermost pieces are the maxillæ and their four-jointed palpi or
feelers, and the innermost piece the labium and its three-jointed
palpi, between which the end of the delicate membranous tongue
appears.

I repeatedly placed leaves from the orange trees covered with cocci
and aphides from rose-bushes and pine trees, all of which are eagerly
sought by several other kinds of ants, in the captive nest, but the
ants never looked twice at them, and this corresponds with the fact
that I have never seen either _structor_ or _barbara_ attending on
or searching for aphides and the like. These captives took part of a
small quantity of honey which I placed in the nest, but displayed no
eagerness about it, and soon neglected and allowed it to be covered
up with earth thrown out from the nest.

The ants work very frequently at night during the dark,[32] and this
is the case in the wild as well as in the captive nests. A friend,
at my request twice visited a nest of _structor_ ants in the garden
of an hotel at Mentone, when it was quite dark (in March, between
seven and eight o'clock P.M.) and no moon, but the light of a candle
showed that the workers, both large and small, were busily engaged
in carrying into the nest seeds which had been purposely scattered
in their neighbourhood. I have myself seen _Pheidole megacephala_
similarly engaged at about nine P.M. on a warm night in April, when
it was perfectly dark, not even the stars showing; but in this
case the ants were collecting from the weeds in the garden. On the
same occasion I also observed long and active trains of _Formica
emarginata_ [a rather small dusky ant, with a yellow thorax], making
for the orange-trees in search of cocci and aphides, just as if it
were broad day.

[Footnote 32: This bears out the much-questioned assertion of
Aristotle, though he only claimed that ants work "by night when the
moon is at the full."--Hist. Anim., lib. ix. cap. xxvi.]

Before leaving Mentone, on May 1, I turned out this second captive
nest, and found that the colony appeared perfectly healthy, and
did not seem to have diminished materially in numbers. The queen
ant and the larvæ seemed to be in just the same state as when they
were taken. The earth in the lower part of the jar was honeycombed
with galleries, granaries, and cells, constructed quite as in the
wild nests, but more crowded together. The granaries were in many
instances full of seeds, which, though very wet, [the surrounding
soil being extremely moist on account of there being no drainage to
carry off the water which I was obliged to sprinkle from time to time
over the surface of the nest], still showed no trace of germination
that I could detect. The ants were therefore able to exercise the
same influence over these seeds, under the strange conditions of
their captive state, that they do in their natural homes.

The foregoing remarks, as has been stated above, refer for the most
part to only one of the three kinds of harvesting ants which I have
observed on the Riviera--that is to say, to _Atta barbara_, the
jet-black ant.

As far as the manner of collecting and storing the seed is concerned,
all that has been said of _Atta barbara_ applies with equal truth to
_A. structor_.

_A. structor_ is, however, less frequently seen above ground from
December to March than _barbara_, and is more frequently found in or
near the streets and gardens of a town.

The fourth species, on the other hand, the little _Pheidole
megacephala_, differs in several particulars. This ant appears to
shun the daylight, and to be most active at night, when, in the warm
weather at the end of April, it may frequently be seen carrying large
quantities of seeds into its nest. I have rarely observed it at work
in the daylight, so that my knowledge of its habits is but small. Nor
have I succeeded in discovering its subterranean granaries, though
I have opened several nests. Still, I believe that it is a true
harvesting ant, and not merely a casual collector of seeds. Of the
habits of _Pheidole pallidula_, a very closely allied and similar
species, but one less frequently met with, I cannot speak with
certainty, though it is quite possible that it also may be a true
harvester, in which case it would add a fifth species to this class.

Both _Pheidole megacephala_ and _Ph. pallidula_ appear to remain
inactive, or nearly so, during the months from November to April, and
it is probable that they are only to be seen in full activity during
the summer when I am not there to watch them.

There can be little doubt that any naturalist who will take the pains
to note the habits of ants on the shores of the Mediterranean through
June, July, August, and September, might collect a most interesting
series of observations on harvesting and other species, and add to,
and perhaps modify, those which my limited opportunities have enabled
me to make.

There are three other ants[33]--namely, _Formica emarginata_, _F.
fusca_, and _Myrmica cæspitum_, which may also occasionally be found
carrying a few seeds, but this is the rare exception, as far as my
experience goes, these species living on honey dew, sweet secretions,
and animal matter, like the great majority of ants all over the
world. I have never found seeds in the nests of any ants except those
of _Atta barbara_ and _A. structor_, though I have carefully searched
for them in most of the nests of the sixteen species of ants whose
habits I have watched.

[Footnote 33: For some details of the habits of the sixteen species
of ants observed on the Riviera, see Appendix A.]

There is every probability that these harvesting ants will be found
all round the shores of the Mediterranean, but the only points at
which I have positively heard of the existence of the habit besides
Mentone, Cannes, and Marseilles, are Capri[34] and Algiers. I am
indebted to Miss Forster for having, during a short visit to Algiers,
devoted some time to watching the habits of the ants in a garden at
that place. These observations were made in April last (1872), when
the three following species were watched:--

[Footnote 34: Where a harvester, probably _Atta barbara_, has been
observed by Mr. Buchanan White. See Appendix C.]

(1) _Formica (Cataglyphis) viatica_, a large, long-legged, blackish
ant, with orange-red and semi-transparent thorax, which never carried
seeds, but lived on animal food, especially flies. (2) _Formica
(Tapinoma) nigerrima_,[35] a rather small dusky ant, which brought in
some seeds to its nest, but principally "animal food, flies, small
worms," &c., and which did not carry the hemp and canary seed strewed
in their path, though on one occasion when Miss Forster scattered
some split hemp seed, they eagerly fastened upon the contents, and
ate some on the spot, while they transported the greater part to
their nest, and (3) _Atta barbara_, which, as on the Riviera, was a
true and most active harvester, and eagerly seized upon the hemp and
canary seed when these were placed in its way.

[Footnote 35: Mr. Smith thinks that this ant is either _F.
nigerrima_, of Nylander, or a new species, but it was not possible
for him to pronounce with absolute certainty as he had only two
specimens of workers from which to judge.]


_Recapitulation and Concluding Remarks._

There are some points of interest suggesting openings for future
observation, to which I will now allude, making at the same time a
partial recapitulation of what has gone before.

We have learned in the first place that the ancients had facts
on their side when they said that the ant is one of the very few
creatures which lays up supplies of food sufficient to last for
months, or even perhaps, as Bochart says, for a whole year; and
though we cannot quite accept the statement that "there is no animal
except men, mice, and ants, that stores its food,"[36] they were
right in saying that the habit is a most singular and interesting
one. It is probable, however, that the old writers may have fallen
into the error of supposing that all ants were harvesters, though the
truth appears to be, that even in hot climates, it is only a very
small number of species that are so. The fact that certain ants in
Southern Europe do store large quantities of sound seed in damp soil,
and check their tendency to germinate, may be thought to favour the
possibility of the existence of those deeply hidden supplies of seed
which, though they have never been detected, are popularly supposed
to explain the sudden appearance of the crops of weeds on soil newly
brought out from great depths.

[Footnote 36: Sophian, quoted by Bochart in his Hierozoïcon, ii. cap.
xxi, p. 497.]

The argument may be stated thus: seeds remain for months undecayed,
and still capable of germination, at depths varying from one to
twenty inches below the surface of the soil in certain ants' nests,
why should they not lie hidden for indefinite periods in ordinary
soil?

To answer this positively, experiments should be made[37] in order
that we might learn whether these seeds can retain their vitality
without sprouting in moist soil; but the general belief is that under
these conditions they will do one of two things, they will either
grow or rot. Be this as it may, one of the most curious points that
we have learned about these ants, is that they know how to preserve
seeds intact, even when within from one to three inches of the
surface of the ground, that is to say, at the actual depth at which a
gardener most frequently sows his seeds, though if these very seeds
are taken out of the granary and sowed by hand, they will germinate
in the ordinary way. It is possible that this may be in part due
to the compact nature of the floors and ceilings of the granaries,
these excluding air in some measure, though as moisture freely passes
through them, and there are always two or three open galleries
leading into the granaries, and which communicate directly with the
open air, I can scarcely accept this explanation as complete.

[Footnote 37: In order to try the experiment fairly, seeds taken
from ants' nests, or seeds of the same species as those which are
habitually found in ants' nests, should be placed at different depths
in the earth and examined after the lapse of six or eight months.

Why it is that certain seeds resist the influences which destroy
the vitality of other seeds of closely allied species is another
and a very curious but complicated problem, the explanation of
which may perhaps lie in the different chemical properties of the
seeds in question, in the more or less permeable character of their
seed-coats, or their general texture.]

The seeds do occasionally sprout in the nest, though it is extremely
rare to find instances of this, and then the ants nip off the little
root, and carry each seed out into the air and sun, exactly as the
old writers have described, and when the growth has been checked and
the seed malted by exposure, they fetch them in again. It is in this
condition that the ants like best to eat them, as I have proved by
experiments among my captives.

As the ants often travel some distance from their nest in search of
food, they may certainly be said to be, in a limited sense, agents
in the dispersal of seeds, for they not unfrequently drop seeds by
the way, which they fail to find again, and also among the refuse
matter which forms the kitchen midden in front of their entrances,
a few sound seeds are often present, and these in many instances
grow up and form a little colony of stranger plants. This presence
of seedlings foreign to the wild ground in which the nest is usually
placed, is quite a feature where there are old established colonies
of _Atta barbara_, as is shown at Fig. A in Plate I., p. 21, where
young plants of fumitory, chickweed, cranesbill, _Arabis Thaliana_,
&c., may be seen on or near the rubbish heap.

It would be interesting to make a list of all these ant-imported
plants, and I think it quite likely that, if a sufficiently large
number of nests were visited, some seedlings of cultivated species
might be found amongst them, for we have seen that garden plants are
frequently put under contribution.

One can imagine cases in which the ants during the lapse of long
periods of time might pass the seeds of plants from colony to
colony, until after a journey of many stages, the descendants of the
ant-borne seedlings might find themselves transported to places far
removed from the original home of their immediate ancestors. It is a
true cause, but at the same time it may be one which has, like many
true causes, exceedingly small effects. One can scarcely look at the
teeming population of an ant's nest, without asking whether there
are any checks to their increase, and if so, what these checks are.
I know very little of what foreign enemies they may have, though I
have occasionally seen them captured by lizards, _Cicindela_ beetles,
and spiders,[38] and it is well known that the females are eagerly
sought for by birds at the season when they are above ground, and
about to found new colonies; but I believe that ants are the ants'
worst enemies, for fearful slaughter and mutilation often result from
the encounter of armies of the same race, but belonging to different
nests.

[Footnote 38: I have seen the remains of ants at the bottom of
the tube of trap-door spider nests, and watched a hunting spider,
_Lycosa_, capture a large black ant (_Formica pubescens_), by
entangling it in threads, which it deftly spun about its limbs, while
running rapidly round the struggling victim in a circle, and dodging
out of the way of the ant's mandibles. In England one may frequently
see ants caught in the spiders' webs among the rose-bushes, and Mr.
Blackwall says, in his Spiders of Great Britain and Ireland, that
_Theridion riparium_ lives principally on ants.]

Harvesting ants have nothing to do, as far as I have been able to
discover, with aphides, cocci, and the like, nor do they seek for
any of those sweet secretions which are the staple food of the
generality of ants; they live, however, on very friendly terms with
certain yellowish-white and satiny-coated "silver-fish" (_Lepisma_),
which are found in the passages and chambers of the nests; but what
their relations are to these creatures and to certain beetles which
have been found in the nests of _Atta barbara_ in Spain and Syria
is unknown. It is possible that by carefully watching captive ants
in company with these creatures under very favourable conditions,
something further might be learned on this head. My captive ants
constructed all their chambers, granaries, and almost all their
galleries away from the glass, and in the interior of the earth,
though I tried to tempt them to work in parts more accessible to
sight by swathing the jar in flannel.

There is much to be learned, I do not doubt, about the friends and
enemies of harvesting ants; and another great desideratum is further
information as to the parts of the world in which they are found and
what causes may be assigned for the limitation of the habit.

What is the geographical distribution of the harvesting species,
and what the geographical distribution of the habit? For instance,
to quote Mr. F. Smith,[39] _Atta structor_, though not "found in
England, is scattered over a great part of Europe, having occurred in
France, Italy, Germany, Austria, Dalmatia, and Switzerland; it has
also been found in Algeria" and Syria; and _A. barbara_ is almost as
widely spread. May we then conclude that these species are harvesters
wherever they are found, and that they store seed in Germany and
Switzerland as freely as they do on the shores of the Mediterranean?
If this be really so, then Huber, whose attention was specially
directed to this point, and a host of laborious and scrupulous
observers of the Continent, have had the very fact under their eyes,
though they have been at considerable pains expressly to deny it.
I cannot think that this is likely, but it is a matter which could
easily be settled by those who travel or reside in Germany, Northern
France, or Switzerland.

[Footnote 39: Mr. F. Smith, On Some New Species of Ants from the Holy
Land, in Journ. Linnean Soc., London, vol. vi. p. 35.]

It seems to me more probable, however, that they do store in the
south, but not in the north; for all the difficulties which attend
the preservation of the seed in the granaries in the south would
be greatly increased in the wet climates of Northern Europe, and
there, moreover, the greater cold would render the ants torpid almost
throughout the winter, when food would not be required. But the
question is plainly an open one. We may also ask why it is that only
a very few out of the many species of ants which inhabit the shores
of the Mediterranean should possess this habit of collecting seeds,
and differ so widely in their manner of living, from their neighbours?

If we wish to put ourselves in the way to answer these queries,
the first thing we should do would be to examine and compare
the structure of the digestive organs and parts of the mouth in
harvesters and non-harvesters, with a view to seeing whether there
may not be some capital difference here.

These observations demand some skill in dissection and preparation,
and in regretting that it has not been in my power to make them, I
can only hope that some one more skilled than I am may undertake the
subject.

It seems probable, that in warmer latitudes there are many conditions
which favour the rapid increase of ants, so that a given tract of
country in Southern Europe, for example, must have on an average more
colonies to support than a similar tract in the north, and that to
meet this increase of population, it has therefore become necessary
for these creatures to seek their subsistence from as many and as
dissimilar sources as possible. The fierce conflicts over booty both
between rival nests of the same and of distinct species, tend to
show that, even as things are, they frequently have to fight for
their food.

Hitherto, as far as I have been able to learn, only nineteen true
harvesting ants have been detected in the whole world, limiting
this term to those species which make the collection of seeds the
principal occupation of their outdoor lives, and are evidently in the
main dependent upon this kind of food for subsistence.

Now if we compare these nineteen species of ants[40] together a very
curious fact forces itself upon our notice--namely, that all of them
are closely related, so much so that not only do all belong to the
same division of ants (the tribe _Myrmicineæ_), but that with one
exception (_Pseudomyrma_) all would have been placed by the great
Fabricius in one genus, _Atta_, and the one exception is not far
removed from it.

[Footnote 40: These are _Myrmica (Atta) barbata_, from Texas and
Mexico; _Œcodoma (Atta) cephalotes_, from Brazil and Mexico; _Œcodoma
(Atta) providens_, from India; _Œcodoma (Atta) diffusa_, from India;
_Atta rufa_, from India; _Pheidole (Atta) megacephala_, from South
France; _Atta barbara_, from South France, Capri, and Algiers; _Atta
structor_, from South France; and _Pseudomyrma rufo nigra_, from
India.]

We must not forget, however, that, as has been stated, there are
other ants which do occasionally collect seeds, and thus appear to
show traces of this remarkable instinct; but as far as I have yet
seen, it is always possible to distinguish them readily from true
harvesters. Still I think it very likely that in hot climates the
division between harvesters and non-harvesters may be bridged over by
a complete chain of intermediates. Here two more questions suggest
themselves for more complete future solution. (1) Do true harvesters
which store seed in granaries ever attend upon aphides and seek for
sweet secretions? (2) Do occasional harvesters ever form granaries?

In any case the name of "the provident one" is only, I suspect, fully
deserved by a limited number of ants, and Æsop, in his well-known
fable, might as properly have made the dialogue which ends in the
recommendation to "dance in winter as he piped in summer," take place
between two ants as between an ant and a grasshopper, as far at least
as their respective foresight is concerned.

Why it is that one ant should require stores of food in the winter of
which other ants have no need, is one of the many problems which only
patient watching and careful comparison and experiment can help us to
solve.

There are not wanting those among the many winter visitors of the
south who have time in abundance or superabundance at their disposal,
and might help to clear up these and many other mysteries, and to
them I would strongly recommend the study of the habits of plants and
animals as a pastime, if nothing more.

The way is open: it is not difficult to follow, and it leads to very
pleasant places.




APPENDIX.


A.

The following are the species of ants which I have observed on the
Riviera, and principally at Mentone; the actual locality where my
notes were taken being given in every case.


_Family Formicidæ._[41]

[Footnote 41: Ants have been divided into three tribes, the two first
of which, _Formicineæ_ and _Ponerineæ_, are distinguished by the
latter having a contraction in the abdomen not found in the former,
and both are separated from the third tribe, _Myrmicineæ_ by having
but a single scale on the petiole, while in _Myrmicineæ_ there are
always two nodes or protuberances on the petiole. It is important to
remember the difference between the first and the last named tribes,
as we shall find that all the true harvesters belong to _Myrmicineæ_.
I have not seen any of the representatives of the second tribe in the
south.]

_Tribe Formicineæ._--Petiole (or stalk which unites the thorax and
the abdomen) of one joint, and furnished with a single vertical
scale, abdomen not contracted.

(1) _Formica fusca_, Linn.--A rather large ant (3-1/2 to 4-1/2 lines
long), of a blackish ash colour, with a satiny sheen on the upper
half of the abdomen. Smells of formic acid when crushed. Lives upon
sweet secretions and animal matter, and occasionally carries a very
few seeds into its nest, which is made in the ground. (Mentone.)

(2) _F. emarginata_, Latr.--Of medium size (2-1/2 lines), brownish,
with yellow thorax. Has a strong smell of honey when crushed. Lives
principally upon sweet secretions, but occasionally carries a very
few seeds also. Nest in the ground. (Mentone.)

(3) _F. (Camponotus) cruentata_, Lat.--Large (5 to 6 lines), dusky
brown, with orange red on legs and abdomen. Strong smell of formic
acid. Lives on sweet secretions and animal matter, and has never
been seen by me carrying seeds. Nest in the ground. (Mentone and
Cannes.)

(4) _F. (Camponotus) marginata_, Latr.--Large (4 to 5-1/2 lines),
black. Has no perceptible smell even when crushed. Lives principally
on sweet secretions, and does not bring in seeds to its nest, which
is made in the ground. I have seen this ant at Cannes ascending the
cork oaks in search of certain cocci which resemble black and shining
berries rather larger than a pea, and which exude sweet secretions.
(Mentone and Cannes.)

(5) _Formica cursor_, Fonscol.--A rather large but slender ant (3 to
4 lines long), nearly black, with a faint bronzy hue, legs very long.
Smell not noted. Runs very swiftly, and is hard to catch; feeds on
sweet secretions, and does not carry seeds. Nest in ground. (Cannes.)

(6) _F._ (species undetermined).--A large ant (5 to 6-1/2 lines),
black brown with yellow thorax and legs. In shape resembles _F.
marginata_. Strong smell of formic acid. Habits not observed. Nest
found under a stone in a pine wood. (Cannes.)

(7) _F._ (species undetermined).--A rather large ant (3 to 4-1/2
lines), resembling _F. fusca_, but having the thorax yellow. Strong
smell of formic acid. Feeds on sweet secretions, and does not carry
seeds. Nest in ground. (Cannes.)

(8) _Formica (Tapinoma) erratica_, Latr.--Rather small (2 lines),
nearly black. Has a strong and most disagreeable smell, something
like rancid oil, which is emitted if the nest is disturbed or the
insect crushed. Lives upon sweet secretions and animal matter, but
rarely if ever carries seeds, and pays no attention to them if placed
in its path. It nests in the ground, and forms superficial covered
ways, roofed in with a thin crust of earth and vegetable fibres
cemented together. (Mentone, Cannes.)

_Tribe Myrmicineæ_. Petiole two jointed, furnished with two nodes
(protuberances).

(9) _Crematogaster (Myrmica) scutellaris_, Oliv.--Of medium
size (3-1/2 to 4 lines), nearly black, with yellowish red head.
Disagreeable smell like rancid oil when crushed. Erects the abdomen
when excited, and runs about with it turned up at right angles to
the body. Lives on sweet secretions, and does not carry seeds. When
dissecting the abdomen of this ant, I noticed that in freshly killed
specimens a drop of poison appears at the extremity of the sting,
which if brushed away will form again several times in succession.
Nest in the bark and wood of sick or decayed trees. (Mentone and
Cannes.)

(10) _C. sordidulus_, Mayr.--Very small (1-1/2 to 2 lines), resembles
_C. scutellaris_, but is uniformly black brown. No perceptible smell.
Lives on sweet secretions, and may frequently be seen inside flowers.
Nest in earth. Behaves like _C. scutellaris_ when excited. (Mentone
and Cannes.)

(11) _Myrmica cæspitum_, Latr.--Small (2 lines), brown. Faint smell
like peat smoke. Feeds on animal food and sweet secretions, and may
occasionally be seen collecting and carrying in seeds. Nest in the
ground. (Mentone and Cannes.)

 (12) _Pheidole (Atta or Myrmica) megacephala_.--Very small (1-1/2 to
2 lines), yellow, the larger workers having enormous heads. Smell
very peculiar, and a trifle like aniseed when crushed. Appears to
be a true harvester, and not to seek for sweet secretions. Nest in
ground. (Mentone and Cannes.)

(13) _Ph. (Atta or Myrmica) pallidula_.--Very small (1-1/2 lines),
pale yellow, closely resembles _Ph. megacephala_, but is paler and
more transparent, and the larger workers have less disproportionate
heads. Smell not noted. Habits not fully observed. Nest in ground.
(Mentone.)

(14) _Atta (Aphenogaster or Myrmica) structor_.--Rather large (2 to 4
lines), of a claret brown. No smell when crushed. A true harvester,
and does not appear to seek for sweet secretions, though it will
occasionally take animal food. Nest in ground or under stones.
(Mentone and Cannes.)

(15) _Atta (Aph. or Myrmica) barbara_.--Rather large (2 to 4 lines),
jet black. No smell when crushed. Habits of _structor_. Nest in
earth, and more frequently in uncultivated ground. I have twice
seen a few ants coloured like _structor_ in colonies of _barbara_.
(Mentone, Cannes, and Marseilles.)

(16) _Atta (Aph. or Myrmica) barbara_ var.--A large ant (3 to 6
lines). The larger workers black, with red or mahogany-coloured
heads, the smaller most frequently black, and like those of _Atta
barbara_, of which this is probably only a variety. It differs
however in its smell, which, when the body is crushed, resembles that
of _Pheidole megacephala_, and is something like aniseed. Habits of
_structor_ and _barbara_. Nest in earth. On one occasion I opened
a large nest at Cannes, where the colony was composed in about
equal parts of ants which in colour and appearance might be said to
represent the three forms, _structor_, _barbara_, and the red-headed
variety of the latter. There were also a few ants with pale yellowish
brown heads. (Mentone and Cannes.)


B.

The following Indian species are described by the late Dr. Jerdon as
harvesters, in the Madras Journal Lit. and Sc. 1851:--

(p. 45). _Atta rufa._--"Its favourite food is dead insects and other
matter, but it also carries off seeds like the _Œcodoma_, chaff,"
&c. &c. (p. 46). _Œcodoma providens._--"Their common food I suspect
to be animal matter, dead insects, &c. &c., which at all events they
take readily, but they also carry off large quantities of seeds of
various kinds, especially light grass seeds, and more especially
garden seeds, as every gardener knows to his cost. They will take
off cabbage, celery, radish, carrot, and tomato seeds, and in some
gardens, unless the pots in which they are sown be suspended or
otherwise protected, the whole of the seeds sown will be removed in
one night. I have also had many packets of seeds (especially lettuce)
in my room completely emptied before I was aware that the ants had
discovered them. I do not know, however, if they eat them or feed
their larvæ on them, though for what other purpose they carry them
off I cannot divine. I have often observed them bring the seeds
outside their holes, as recorded by Colonel Sykes, and this I think
generally at the close of the rainy season; but in some cases I had
reason to believe that it was merely the husks, of which I have seen
quite heaps, and that the ants did not take them back to their nests.
If any of the forementioned seeds be sown out at once in a bed, most
likely in the morning the surface of the whole spot will be found
covered over with little ridges, the works of these creatures, and
the few seeds that perhaps remain, dug all round, and being carried
off sometimes above ground, at other times under ground. Their
galleries and subterranean passages are often very extensive, and it
is no easy matter to dig down to their nest to see what becomes of
the seeds." _Œcodoma diffusa_ has the same habits as _Œ. providens_.

Lieut.-Col. Sykes, _Descriptions of New Indian Ants_ in _Trans. Ent.
Soc. Lond._, i. 103 (1836).

_Atta providens_, Sykes. "In illustration of the habits of this
species of ant, I shall give the following extract from my
diary:--'Poona, June 19, 1829. In my morning walk I observed more
than a score of little heaps of grass-seeds (_Panicum_) in several
places on uncultivated land near the parade-ground; each heap
contained about a handful. On examination, I found they were raised
by the above species of ant, hundreds of which were employed in
bringing up the seeds to the surface from a store below; the grain
had probably got wet at the setting in of the monsoon, and the ants
had taken advantage of the first sunny day to bring it up to dry.
The store must have been laid up from the time of the ripening of
the grass-seeds in January and February. As I was aware this fact
militated against the observations of entomologists in Europe, I was
careful not to deceive myself by confounding the seeds of a _Panicum_
with the pupæ of the insect. Each ant was charged with a single seed,
but as it was too weighty for many of them, and as the strongest had
some difficulty in scaling the perpendicular sides of the cylindrical
hole leading to the nest below, many were the falls of the weaker
ants with their burdens from near the summit to the bottom. I
observed they never relaxed their hold, and with a perseverance
affording a useful lesson to humanity, steadily recommenced the
ascent after each successive tumble, nor halted in their labour until
they had crowned the summit, and lodged their burden on the common
heap.'"

(p. 104). "On the 13th of October of the same year, after the closing
thunderstorms of the monsoon, I found this species in various places
similarly employed as they had been in June preceding; one heap
contained a double handful of grass-seeds. It is probable that the
_Atta providens_ is a field species of ant, as I have not observed it
in the houses."


C.

After the appearance of a brief notice of a communication which I
sent in the winter of 1871-72 to the London Entomological Society,
announcing the fact that certain ants harvest seeds in a systematic
way at Mentone, two papers were published, in which confirmatory
evidence of the existence of the habit in other parts of the world
was set forth--one by Mr. Buchanan White, and the other by the late
Mr. Horne.

Mr. Horne's account of his observations was published in _Hardwicke's
Science Gossip_, No. 89, p. 109 (for May 1, 1872), and runs as
follows:[42]--

"My notes carry me to the far East, where I have often watched
this most interesting class of insects, and briefly recorded my
observations--unfortunately cut short by illness, and the necessity
of return to Europe, which must be my apology for their want of
completeness.

[Footnote 42: I omit the preliminary portion, in which my
observations are erroneously stated to have been made at Nismes and
Capri.]

"But before transcribing, I would remind my general reader that
all ants may be seen carrying off food to their nests for present
consumption, and that this food consists of a great variety of
substances. This is disposed of inside the said nest, being often
masticated, and the juice extracted by the workers, and then given
in an inspissated form from their mouths to the young grubs, which
are in general tended by their nurses with the greatest care. It is
indeed very curious to watch this feeding process; but to proceed.

"Under date Nov. 7th, 1866, I find in my natural history note-book as
follows:--Mainpuri. This morning as I was walking across the 'Oosur,'
or waste plain, where it was very sandy, being cut into small
ravines, and clothed only here and there with fine grass disposed in
clumps, thus forming little hillocks of sand blown by the wind, and
arrested in its course by the grass, I came across a long line of
ants, travelling four deep, some coming empty, and others laden each
with one grass-seed, on their way home.

"I followed up the procession to the nest, which was subterranean,
and at the mouth of which on the level plain there was no trace of
elevation caused by the soil brought up from below, owing to the
habit of these ants of taking each grain of sand to some distance
along their road, and depositing it on one side or the other.

"There may have been five or six entrances to the nest, in and out
of which a prodigious number of ants were passing, the species
of which has been described by Dr. Jerdon. They were of a medium
size, shortish bodies, and of a reddish-brown colour--_Pseudomyrma
rufo-nigra_, Jerdon. Around the mouth of the nest, forming a circle
of perhaps eighteen inches in diameter, was a space beaten flat, and
kept clear by these said ants, from which radiated in every direction
thirteen roads, each about four inches in width for about thirty
to forty yards, when they branched off and became narrower, being
ultimately lost amongst the grass roots. These paths were fairly
straight; they did not cut through elevations, but went round them.

"From a careful examination it appeared that they had been cleared
of all obstacles, such as small stones, twigs, &c., but that their
smoothness resulted only from the tread of countless feet.

"The bearers of burdens took the seeds _into_ the nest, which I did
not dig up, and certainly stored them there, after having prepared
them, probably by the removal of a portion of the outer husk. Of
these husks there were large collections near the entrances to the
nest, all carefully set aside by the ants.

"In times of famine, I am told, not only are the nests rifled of
their grass-seed stores, but these heaps of apparent husks are
collected and ground with other grain to eke out a subsistence.

"This kind of grain has a name, 'Jurroon,' derived from 'Jharna,' to
sweep, literally sweepings. I much regret that I have not preserved
specimens of this 'Jurroon,' for it is very unlikely that the ants
after taking it to their granary, should again throw it out, and yet,
if grainless, what benefit could there be in eating it? The season
of the year when I observed them (November) is the beginning of the
cold weather, and no rain would probably fall (excepting a little at
Christmas) till next May or June. Later on seed would be rare; and
how the nest fares at a time when floods of water often pass over the
plain I cannot conceive.

"It is clear that some escape, and we know with what prodigious
rapidity these colonies increase. But these jottings have been
recorded merely to show how this species of ant store grain against a
time of scarcity, and fully bear out the statement in the text with
which I commenced this paper."

The following are Dr. Buchanan White's notes, alluded to above,
published in the _Transactions of the Entomological Society_ (London,
1872) part i., Proceedings, p. v.:--

"Capri, June 3, 1866. In the afternoon to the Punta Tragara, where a
colony of ants afforded us much amusement. These little insects had
a regular road, made by cutting away the grass and other plants in
their way. This road was about one inch and a half wide, and several
yards long, and led to a clump of plants in seed. Along this road
a long train of ants were perpetually travelling to the nest (or
_formicarium_), bearing with them pods of leguminous plants, seeds of
grass and of Composites (_Chrysanth. segetum_), &c.

"The perseverance with which a single ant would tug and draw a pod
four times his own length was very interesting; sometimes three or
four ants would unite in carrying one burden. Near the formicarium
was a great mass of débris, consisting of empty pods, twigs, emptied
snail shells, &c., cast out by the ants. The seeds appeared to be
stored inside the nest, as in one that I opened the other day I found
a large collection. The species was a black ant; the formicarium was
underground."


D.

_On Collecting and Examining Ants._

There are very few branches of natural history which might be more
easily followed by a traveller, or one who fears to encumber
himself with bulky collections difficult to transport from place to
place, than the study of ants. The whole European ant fauna might be
adequately represented by specimens preserved in spirit of wine and
packed in the compass of a hat-box.

In taking specimens of ants it is important never to put the
representatives of more than one nest in each bottle, but then in
most cases a sufficient number may be placed in a single bottle of
the size used for containing the smaller homœopathic globules. If
possible the winged male and female ants, as well as the wingless
workers, should be secured.

The ants die very quickly in pure spirit of wine, and they can
afterwards, even after the lapse of months or more, be pinned out in
the cabinet after having been washed in warm water. In examining the
mouth organs of an ant in order to determine by the aid of books to
what genus it belongs, it is best to relax the parts by first washing
away the spirit of wine, and then leaving the specimen for a day or
more in a stopper bottle partly filled with finely chopped laurel
leaves. It is probable that a drop or two of prussic acid on a bit of
sponge might act as effectually in rendering the tissues pliable.

A compound microscope is necessary for the final examination of the
joints of the labial and maxillary palpi (see Fig. D 2, Plate I.,
p. 21); but the neuration of the wing (D 1, Plate I.), another very
important character, is easily detected with a good pocket-lens.

The works which may most usefully be consulted are, for France, M.
Nylander's _Formicides de France et d'Algérie_, published in vol.
v. of the fourth series of the Zoological Division of the _Annales
des Sciences Naturelles_; for England, Mr. F. Smith's _Catalogue of
British Fossorial Hymenoptera_ (1856); and for a more general review
of the species in the world at large, Mr. F. Smith's _Catalogue of
Hymenopterous Insects in the Collection of the British Museum_, Part
vi., _Formicidæ_ (1858), and M. Mayr's _Beiträge zur Kenntniss der
Ameisen_, published in the _Verhandlungen des Zoologisch-botanischen
Vereines in Wien_, iii. 1853. _Abhandlungen_ (p. 101).




                              PART II.

                         TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS.




PART II.

TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS.


It is now one hundred and sixteen years since Patrick Browne gave an
illustration in his _Civil and Natural History of Jamaica_[43] of the
nest of a trap-door spider, the first record of the kind with which
I am acquainted. Seven years later the careful observations of the
Abbé Sauvages appeared,[44] in which he gave a very good description
of the nests of the "araignée maçonne" (_Nemesia cæmentaria_), which
he discovered near Montpellier, likening them to little rabbit
burrows lined with silk and closed by a tightly-fitting moveable
door. In 1778 and 1794 Rossi[45] published an interesting account of
the nest and habits of a trap-door spider which he had observed in
Corsica and near Pisa; and from that time up to the present day the
curious dwellings of these creatures, many species of which have been
discovered in warm climates, have continued to attract the attention
of naturalists.

[Footnote 43: P. 420, tab. 44, fig. 3 a. This work was published in
London in 1756.]

[Footnote 44: In Histoire de l'Acad. Royale des Sciences (Paris
1763), p. 26-30.]

[Footnote 45: Rossi (P.), Osservazione Insettologische (Memorie di
Matematica e Fisica della Società Italiana, vol. iv. (1778), and
Fauna Etrusca, vol. ii. (1794)).]

Very little, however, has been added to our knowledge of the
life-history of these remarkable architects for several years past,
and, indeed, I think it may be safely asserted that the study of the
habits and interdependence of the members of the animate world has
not, during the last fifty years, made anything like a corresponding
progress to that which may be seen in classification and description.
The microscope has led many who, a century ago, would have found
their chief delight in observing those points in the habits and
external characters of living creatures which the naked eye could
readily seize upon, to look much closer, to anatomize and describe in
detail every organism, great and small, and to examine every tissue
and cell.

It is, however, to the materials now being amassed by these modern
"cabinet naturalists" that recourse must be had if we wish to form
a true comprehension of the functions and habits of living things.
They must tell us, for example, what instruments, tactile and visual,
an animal possesses if we wish to understand how it constructs a
particular fabric, so that the "field naturalist" will have to apply
to his brother of the "cabinet" before he can turn his observations
to good account.

Still, the fact remains that the habits of plants and animals afford
many openings for careful investigation, and such as are especially
within the reach of those lovers of nature who have ample time at
their disposal, and the opportunity to spend it in a warm climate
where life abounds, and is never wholly checked even in the depth of
winter. It seems strange to think that collectors so frequently take
creatures out of wonderfully constructed nests and yet never observe,
or at any rate never describe, the structure of these fabrics.
Thus, for example, the dwellings of only eight out of the thirty-six
species of trap-door spider stated by Prof. Ausserer[46] to belong to
the Mediterranean region are known in books, those of the remaining
twenty-eight being, as far as I have been able to learn, yet to be
discovered. This is the more strange as from the nocturnal habits
of these creatures it is almost always necessary to dig them out
of their nests; indeed it is more than probable that if all the
dwellings which have been destroyed had been described, the following
pages would never have appeared.

[Footnote 46: Prof. Ausserer (Anton.), Beiträge zur Kenntniss der
Arachniden Familie der Territelariæ (Mygalidæ), in Verhandlungen der
k.k. Zool. Bot. Gesellschaft in Wien. Jahrg. 1871, Band xxi.]

Before proceeding to pass briefly in review what has been written on
the subject of trap-door spiders, it will be well to take one glance
at the relation which these spiders bear to their fellows. The great
order of spiders (_Araneæ_) has recently[47] been divided into seven
sub-orders, the fourth of which, _Territelariæ_, includes all the
trap-door spiders, and some others which do not construct trap-doors.
This sub-order corresponds with that which was formerly called
_Mygalidæ_, but this name, as well as that of _Mygale_, originally
given to all trap-door spiders, has been abandoned because this
latter name had previously been applied to a genus of Mammals, and it
was feared that confusion might arise.

[Footnote 47: Thorell, On European Spiders, in Nova Acta Reg. Soc.
Scient. Upsaliensis, ser. iii. vol. vii. fasc. 1 and 2 (1869-70).]

The _Territelariæ_ [or underground weavers] are distinguished from
all other spiders by the position of their falces,[48] which have
the fang directed downwards, and move vertically parallel to one
another. Thus when a victim is seized by one of the _Territelariæ_
it receives a downward blow, while other spiders strike sideways,
the falces moving in a horizontal or oblique direction. With very
few exceptions this sub-order may also be known by the presence of
four blotches of paler colour at the base of the abdomen underneath,
indicating the position of four air-sacs, almost all, or indeed
perhaps all, other spiders having but two.

[Footnote 48: Sometimes called mandibles. One of these is
represented, enlarged, at Fig. A 7. in Plate VII., p. 88.]

Certain species of _Territelariæ_ are the only spiders known to
construct nests closed with a door, and these creatures must be
admitted to rank among the first of Nature's handicraftsmen and
inventors.

The geometrical webs of many common spiders are very beautiful
structures, but these are for the most part only snares for prey, and
not permanent dwellings, although the cocoons in which the eggs are
placed are often most ingeniously contrived. Thus in the south we
may sometimes find an inverted balloon of strong silk about an inch
long attached to heath and other bushes, which, if examined during
the winter, will be found to contain in its centre a case enclosing
a mass of eggs about one-third the bulk of the entire cocoon.
This inner case is shaped exactly like the outer, and both have a
circular silk lid carefully closed, and the space between the two is
filled with a dense mass of golden-brown silk, which acts no doubt
as an excellent non-conductor. This cocoon is the work of _Epeira
fasciata_, a species apparently only found in southern Europe.

Other spiders again, such as _Theridion_,[49] suspend by a long
and delicate cord of silk a minute balloon, scarcely larger than
a seed-pearl, containing their eggs, which sways to and fro in
the lightest breath of air. But admirable as these cocoons and
geometrical snares are, the homes of these and of spiders generally
do not exhibit much contrivance or ingenuity, or cannot at any rate
be ranked in the same category as those of the trap-door spider. But
it may be asked, why should we admire the one more than the other,
since it is clear that the most squalid and mean-looking nest exactly
serves the purpose of its occupant, whether for shelter or defence,
and in many cases a spider might even say with truth that as for her
home it would not be so safe if it were not so dirty.

[Footnote 49: _Theridion variegatum_ (Bl.). _Ero tuberculata_, Koch.]

But the answer is simple: the trap-door spider's dwelling is to that
of common spiders what the Mont Cenis tunnel is to other tunnels, and
something besides.

What delights us is to see how by clever contrivance and great
perseverance new and multiplied difficulties have been overcome, and
dangers avoided, and the interest aroused is exactly proportionate to
the amount of these difficulties and dangers.

It is hoped that the following pages and their accompanying
illustrations will vindicate the claims of these spiders to the
marked attention and admiration which is here asserted to be their
due as architects and engineers.

There is but one British or North European representative of the
_Territelariæ_--namely, _Atypus piceus_ (or _Sulzeri_),[50] and this
creature does not appear to deserve the name of trap-door spider,
for in three nests which M. H. Lucas kindly showed me, preserved at
the Jardin des Plantes at Paris, the mouth of the tube was destitute
of any covering. I gathered from what I saw, and from what M. Lucas
told me, that these nests [which he had taken in the neighbourhood
of Paris], consist of a silk tube from eight to ten inches long,
of which about one inch only at the lower extremity penetrates the
earth, the remainder being carried upwards in an irregular and
sinuous course among the stems and leaves of small plants and grasses
to which it is attached. When the tube is removed from these supports
it collapses, and appears like a rather coarsely woven ribbon-shaped
strip of silk.[51]

[Footnote 50: Unless it should prove, as Prof. Ausserer suggests,
that the British _Atypus_ is distinct from the Continental, when it
would bear the name of _Atypus Blackwallii_. (Ausserer, l. c. p. 17).]

[Footnote 51: I have never been able to meet with an English specimen
of the nest of _Atypus_; but it would appear from the descriptions
that the English differ from the French nests in being subterranean,
and in having the mouth of the tube concealed by a loose flap of
silk. Mr. Blackwall says: [Spiders of Great Britain and Ireland, part
i. p. 14] "Dr. Leech has taken specimens of _Atypus Sulzeri_ in the
vicinity of London and Exeter. It excavates, in humid situations, a
subterraneous gallery, which is at first horizontal, but inclines
downwards towards its termination. In this gallery it spins a tube
of white silk, of a compact texture, about half inch in diameter....
Part of the tube hangs outside of the aperture to protect the
entrance."

It would be interesting to learn whether these differences
permanently distinguish the English from the French nests, and if so,
whether the spiders which construct them are not, as Prof. Ausserer
is inclined to believe, distinct also.]

Four types of trap-door nest, properly so called, may now be
distinguished in the world at large, and these are represented
diagrammatically in the following woodcut.[52]

[Footnote 52: Where all the figures, except C 1, and D 1, which are
of the natural size, are reduced to about one-third of the actual
size in large specimens.]

Of these two only (A and B) were known up to the present time, the
construction of which is much simpler than that of the two new types
(C and D), which I have hitherto only found at Mentone and Cannes.[53]

[Footnote 53: It must not be supposed that I have a sole or prior
claim to what may prove to be new and of interest in the following
observations on the Trap-door Spiders of the Riviera. This priority
belongs to the Hon. Mrs. Richard Boyle, to whom I owe it that I ever
took up the subject. It was, thanks to her guidance, that I first
became acquainted with these marvellously-concealed nests in their
native haunts, and to her active help that I finally arrived at a
comprehension of the different types of structure which they present.]

[Illustration]

It will be seen at a glance that A and B have but one door, while C
and D have two, these latter having a surface door, and also another
door a short way under ground.

All the nests consist of a tube excavated in the earth to a greater
or less depth, unbranched in all but D, and in every case lined with
silk, this lining being continuous with the lining of the door or
doors of which it forms the hinge.

I have found it convenient to distinguish these four types of nests
by the following names:--A, the single door cork nest, or shortly
the cork nest; B, the single door wafer nest; C, the double door
unbranched nest; and D, the double door branched nest.

The type B has only been found in the West India Islands, and is
chiefly distinguished from A by having a thin and wafer-like door,
wholly constructed of silk, without admixture of earth, lying on
rather than fitting into the aperture of the tube; while in A
the door is much thicker, made of layers of earth and silk, and
so contrived that it tightly closes the mouth of the tube, which
is bevelled to receive it, much as a cork closes the neck of a
bottle.[54]

[Footnote 54: Nests belonging to the type A, are represented in
Plates VII., p. 88, and VIII., p. 94.]

The West Indian nests are of a much tougher and coarser texture than
those which I have seen in Europe, and vary somewhat in the shape of
their tube, which is curved or straight, and sometimes has near its
lower extremity a short spur-shaped enlargement, giving to the whole
a ludicrous resemblance to a stocking, of which this spur is the heel.

Mr. Gosse,[55] in his _Naturalist's Sojourn in Jamaica_, has given
an admirable description of one of these single door wafer nests, the
work of _Cteniza nidulans_, which I cannot do better than quote:--

[Footnote 55: Gosse (P. H.), Naturalist's Sojourn in Jamaica (1851),
p. 115-118. See also for another description of the same nest
Latreille's Vues Générales sur les Araneides, in the Nouv. Ann. du
Muséum (Paris, 1832), tom. i. p. 73-4.]

The nest is "cylindrical, or nearly so, from four to ten inches deep,
and about one inch in diameter; the bottom is rounded; and the top,
which is at the surface of the soil, is closed very accurately with
a circular lid. They are not all equally finished, some being much
more compact, and having the lid more closely fitted than others.
Some have irregular bulgings, and ragged laminated offsets on the
outer surface; but all are smooth and silky on the inside.... The
mouth of the tube, and the parts near it, are very strong; the walls
here often having a thickness of from one-eighth to one-fourth of an
inch; but the lower parts are much thinner. The lid is continuous
with the tube for about a third of its circumference, and this part
may be called the hinge, though it presents no structure peculiar to
itself; it is simply bent at a right angle, as is manifest, if a nest
be cut longitudinally through with scissors, the incision passing
through the midst of the lid. The mode of construction, I judge, from
examination of many nests, to be this. The spider digs a cylindrical
hole in the moist earth, with her jointed fangs or mandibles,
carrying out the fragments as they are dislodged. When the excavation
has proceeded a little way, she begins to spin the lining which
forms the dwelling. I conclude thus, because nests are occasionally
found a few inches in length, with the lid and upper part perfect,
but without any bottom, these being evidently in the course of
formation. I suppose that she weaves her silk at first in unconnected
patches, against the earthy sides, perhaps where the mould is liable
to fall in; and thus I account for the loose rough laminæ of silk
that are always found projecting from the outer surface. These are
overlaid with other patches more and more extensive, until the whole
interior walls are covered; after which the silk is spun evenly and
continuously all round the interior, in successive layers of very
dense texture, though thin. Under the microscope, with a power of 220
diameters, these layers are resolved into threads laid across each
other and intertwined in a very irregular manner; some are simple,
varying from 1/7000 to 1/2000 of an inch in diameter, and others are
compound, several threads, in one part separate, being united into
one of greater thickness which cannot then be resolved.... The mouth
of the tube is commonly dilated a little, so as to form a slightly
recurved brim or lip; and the lid is sometimes a little convex
internally, so as to fall more accurately into the mouth and close it.

"The thickening of the hinge by additional layers is, I think,
accidental only, as, out of the many specimens that I have examined,
only one or two had such a structure. In the neatest examples, the
lid is of equal thickness throughout its extent, agreeing also with
the walls for the first few inches of their depth."

Mr. Gosse says that he possesses one specimen of peculiar
compactness, which differs from all the others that he has examined
in having "a row of minute holes, such as might be made by a very
fine needle, pierced around the free edge of the lid, and a double
row of similar ones just within the margin of the tube. There are
about fifteen or sixteen punctures in each series, and they penetrate
through the whole substance, the light being clearly seen through
each hole. I do not think, as I have somewhere seen suggested, that
they are intended to afford a hold for the spider's claws when she
would keep her door shut against the efforts of an enemy, for what
would be the use of having them in the tube _close to the lid_, so
close that not the eighth of an inch intervenes between the surface
of the lid and that of the tube, when the former is tightly closed? I
would suggest whether they may not be air-holes, for so tight is the
fitting of the lid, and so compact the texture of the material, that
I should suppose the interior would be impermeable to air but for
this contrivance."[56] "The spider that inhabits this nest is black,
with the thorax of an exceedingly lustrous polish, its abdomen is
full and round, its legs very short."

[Footnote 56: I cannot myself think this explanation probable, and
should still be inclined to consider these punctures to be the claw
marks of the spider, as is the case in some European nests.]

Another form of this single door wafer nest is described by Mr.
Sells,[57] in which there is a hinge-like thickening of the silk
lining of the tube about an inch below the actual hinge of the door,
which it is suggested may serve to give additional elasticity.
This was not found, however, in all the nests examined, and Mr.
Sells conjectures that in newly constructed nests the lid may close
sufficiently firmly without this contrivance, and that it is only
added in older nests.

[Footnote 57: Mr. W. Sells. Notes respecting the Nest of _Cteniza
nidulans_, in Trans. Ent. Soc. ii. 207-210.]

Patrick Browne's figure, to which reference has been made above,
represents a nest with two doors, one applied against the other, at
the mouth of the tube, and it has often been asked what this could
possibly mean.

Some have thought that the drawing was fanciful, others that it was
made from an abnormal or injured nest. However, I believe that the
drawing, though rude, is, in fact, not very incorrect, and shows a
case of repair or enlargement of the nest, a subject to be treated of
more fully further on. There is a specimen exhibited in the British
Museum which in this respect very nearly corresponds with Browne's
figure; it is labelled "Nest of Trap-door Spider with two doors,
from the spider having enlarged its abode.--Jamaica." Here one sees
that the spider has prolonged its tube about half an inch beyond the
original mouth of the nest, where it has constructed a new mouth and
door, the old door standing straight up at the back of and behind the
new one.

I imagine that the explanation of this curious piece of cobbling may
be somewhat as follows:--When the nest was in its original state and
had but one door, this door became by some accident covered over with
earth to about the depth of half an inch, and the inmate was thus
imprisoned. Then the spider, being, like most other members of its
order, very unwilling to abandon its home, determined to clear away
the entrance to its nest, and to lengthen the tube so that it should
reach up to the new level of the surface of the earth.... If I am
right, this should rather be called a lengthening than an enlargement
of the tube.

The nests of the cork type (A, p. 79) may usually be distinguished
at a glance from those of the wafer type by the greater thickness
of the door, and by its manner of shutting, but a nest from Morocco
has been figured and described by Prof. Westwood,[58] which seems
intermediate between the two. The door in this case may perhaps be
considered as of the cork type, though it is very thin, for it does
fit into the mouth of the tube, which is bevelled to receive it.

[Footnote 58: Observations on the Species of Trap-door Spiders, in
Trans. of Entomological Soc., London, 1841-3, vol. iii. p. 175.

I wish to take the present opportunity of thanking Prof. Westwood for
having afforded me special facilities for examining this and other
specimens forming part of the very valuable collections under his
care at Oxford.]

These nests were forwarded with their living occupants (_Cteniza
[Actinopus] ædificatorius_) from Tangiers to Prof. Westwood, who
describes the nests as being "about four inches deep, slightly curved
within, about three quarters of an inch in diameter, the valve at the
mouth not being circular, but rather of an oval form, one side where
the hinge is placed being straighter than the other. The valve is
formed of a number of layers of coarse silk, in the upper layers of
which are imbedded particles of the earth, so as to give the cover
the exact appearance of the surrounding soil, the several successive
layers causing it, when more closely inspected, to resemble a small
flattened oyster-shell."

The resemblance between this nest and that of the West Indian species
is the more interesting as Prof. Westwood says that both belong to
the same genus, (_Cteniza_ or _Actinopus_ of different authors,)
and are so closely allied as to present scarcely any important
distinction but that of size.

We shall find, however, on comparing the nests of these trap-door
spiders and their occupants, that we cannot as yet make any rule as
to the kind of nest which we may expect from a given spider.

It will be seen that species belonging to the same genus, and closely
resembling one another, sometimes build dissimilar nests; while
others, belonging to different genera, and unlike in many important
respects, construct almost identical nests.

This is the more strange, because, if we examine the structure of the
claws and palpi, they often seem to be specially adapted to serve as
carding instruments and to play a very important part in the weaving
of the silk linings of the nest; and yet nests of the same type are
occasionally produced by spiders in which these appendages are quite
unlike, and dissimilar nests where the claws and palpi are to all
appearance identical.

Thus, for example, if the reader will examine the drawings of part
of the foremost right foot of _Cteniza fodiens_, figs. A, 9 and 10,
Plate VII., p. 88, with that of _Nemesia cæmentaria_, figs. A, 9 and
10, Plate VIII., p. 94, both of which make nests of the cork type,
he will see that in the former the last joint of the tarsus is armed
along the inner side, with many moveable spines, and that each of the
two curved terminal claws has only one very strong tooth near the
base; while the same joint of the latter (_N. cæmentaria_) has no
spines, and the claws have three minute comb-like teeth near the base.

On the other hand, in the reverse case, where the structure of the
same joint is very similar, the nests may be wholly unlike, as in
_Nemesia Eleanora_, Plate XII., p. 106, and _N. cæmentaria_, Plate
VIII., where the nest of the former is of the double-door unbranched
type, and that of the latter of the single-door cork type.

It is probable however that a fuller and closer comparison of, and a
more exact acquaintance with the several parts and their functions
might show us that all spiders which spin similar webs are furnished
with equivalent instruments, so that what one leg lacks another may
possess in some shape or another; brushes of stiff hairs in one
place, compensating for a toothed claw, or for a row of moveable
spines in another.[59]

[Footnote 59: The claws are probably of first-rate importance in this
respect and should be most carefully studied. M. Lucas has stated
that the claws of _Mygale Blondii_, and _M. nigra_ from Algiers, and
of _M. nigra_ and _M. avicularia_ from Brazil, are retractile like
those of a cat! Unfortunately the dwellings of these spiders have
not been described. See Lucas (H.) in Rev. et Mag. de Zoologie, sér.
2, tom. ix. 1857, p. 587, and Ann. de la Soc. Entom. de France, ser.
3, tom. v. p. cxx., and vi. p. clxxi. Another curious point in which
spiders differ is the presence or absence of viscidity in the hairs
which clothe their feet and palpi. Mr. Blackwall states (Spiders of
Great Britain and Ireland, vol. i. p. 13), that by far the greater
number of the sub-order _Territelariæ_, or _Mygalidæ_ as he terms
them, "have the inferior surface of their biungulate tarsi, and of
the digital joint of their pediform palpi, in the females, densely
clothed with compound, hair-like papillæ, constituting an apparatus
which, by the emission of a viscous secretion, enables them to
traverse the perpendicular surfaces of dry, highly polished bodies;
others have three pairs of spinners and are destitute of hair-like
papillæ on the legs and palpi."

The four species of trap-door spider on the Riviera, here described,
appear to form exceptions to this rule, however, for they all
remained helpless prisoners when placed in a glass tumbler, though
struggling vigorously for freedom.

When, however relying on this experience, I placed a number of
smaller spiders of different kinds in glasses for examination some
walked straight out without any difficulty, while others were unable
to climb up the sides.]

It would be interesting, from this point of view, to draw all the
parts which may be supposed to aid in the act of weaving, and so to
contrast the corresponding limbs of different spiders, the nests of
which are known, that one might see at a glance in what they differed
and agreed. I have done this for the falces and the last joint of
the foremost right foot of the four spiders figured in Plates VII.,
VIII., IX., and XII., but to make the case complete all the limbs
should be represented in the same way.

Of the two spiders which are shown with their cork nests in Plates
VII. and VIII., the purplish grey _Cteniza fodiens_, (Plate VII.)
appears to be much rarer than the brown striped _Nemesia cæmentaria_
(VIII.), at any rate at Mentone. I have hitherto only succeeded
in obtaining four specimens of the former, though I have searched
repeatedly for them at Cannes and Mentone, while the latter species
is tolerably common.

The nests are, however, often extremely hard to find, and in some
cases it is only by chance that I have been able to light upon them.
All these trap-door spiders seem usually to prefer rather moist
and shady places, and sloping banks or loose terrace walls where
the interstices between the stones are filled up with earth, and
concealment is afforded by the creeping lycopodium (_Selaginella
denticulata_), Ceterach, spleen-wort or maiden-hair ferns, with short
moss and splashes of white lichen to distract the eye.

It was from such a terrace wall at Mentone, on March 26, 1872, that
the nest A in Plate VII. was taken, the tube running obliquely back
into the earth between the stones, and the door being concealed by a
net-work of lycopodium, one spray of which had been allowed to grow
on its upper surface.

The tubes of these as of the other kinds of nest are sometimes
straight, but more frequently they are bent, and almost always take a
downward course.

The following is Mr. Pickard-Cambridge's description[60] of _Cteniza
fodiens_, the spider which constructs this nest.

[Footnote 60: The following description and remarks, printed in a
different type, have been kindly prepared for this work by the Rev.
O. Pickard-Cambridge, to whom I sent a series of specimens of the
spiders preserved in spirit of wine and their nests. My very sincere
thanks are due to Mr. Pickard-Cambridge for this assistance, which
will give to my publication a value in the eyes of Arachnologists
which it could not otherwise have possessed. To all those who wish
to study the true structural relations of the four spiders, the
habits of which are recorded in the following pages, these details
will prove of the highest importance; while those who are only
interested in the economy of these creatures can readily pass them
over. For observers in the field there is a very ready way of knowing
these four spiders apart, as it will be seen that when they are
somewhat alike the nests are different (_Nemesia meridionalis_ and
_N. Eleanora_), and when the nests are alike (_Cteniza fodiens_ and
_Nemesia cæmentaria_) the spiders are markedly dissimilar.]

[Illustration: _Plate VI._]

                         FAM. THERAPHOSIDES.

                         Gen. Cteniza, Latr.

                     Cteniza fodiens. Plate VII.

  Syn. _Mygale fodiens_, Walck. _Ins. Apt._, i. p. 237.

  _M. Sauvagei_, Ausserer, _Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Arachniden
  Familie der Territelariæ (Thor.)_, p. 36.

  Female adult length 10 lines.

  _Cephalothorax_ oblong oval, somewhat truncate at each end, and of
  a dull whitish-yellow brown colour, the normal grooves and furrows
  are strongly marked, the caput is large and elevated, rounded on
  the sides and slightly higher near the occiput than at the ocular
  area, the junction of the thoracic segments is indicated by a
  strong deep curved indentation, the curve directed backwards;
  there are a few strong black bristles of different lengths within
  the ocular space, and several others run backwards in the central
  line to the occiput. The height of the Clypeus is equal to rather
  more than the diameter of one of the foremost eyes. The _Eyes_ are
  eight, and form a rectangular figure whose transverse diameter
  is the longest, and whose fore side is a little shorter than
  the hinder one; the longitudinal diameter is about equal to the
  space between the two foremost eyes; these are the largest of the
  eight, and are separated by an interval of very nearly two eyes'
  diameters; the two central eyes are the smallest, and are distant
  from each other just about one eye's diameter, the eyes of the
  hinder row are in two pairs forming the hinder corners of the
  rectangle, those of each pair are nearly contiguous to each other,
  and the inner one of each is the smallest; these last in the figure
  appear to be the smallest of the eight, but this arises from the
  point of view whence the figure was drawn; the two central eyes
  occupy as nearly as possible the centre of the figure formed by the
  two foremost eyes, and the two inner ones of the hinder row, and
  are seated on a large black spot. The _Legs_ are short, strong,
  and similar to the Cephalothorax in colour, their relative length
  appeared to be 4, 3, 1, 2, they are furnished with hairs, bristles,
  and short strong spines. These latter are on those of the two first
  pairs, situated chiefly in two longitudinal parallel rows beneath
  the tibiæ, metatarsi, and tarsi; on those of the third pair they
  are situated on the sides and upper sides of those joints, while
  the fourth pair has them only beneath the metatarsi and tarsi; all
  the tarsi terminate with three claws, the two superior ones are
  much the longest and strongest, and have a single short strong
  tooth inside near the base. Near the union of the femora and genuæ
  of the legs of the fourth pair are numerous short strong spines,
  hairs, and bristles. The _Palpi_ are similar in colour to the
  legs; they are strong and about equal in length to the legs of the
  second pair, and have a double longitudinal row of strong spines
  widely separated and divergent from each other beneath them; the
  digital joint (like the tarsi of the legs) is furnished with other
  spines between these two rows; each palpus terminates with a single
  untoothed curved claw. The _Falces_ are strong, prominent, rounded
  in the profile line, and have some hairs, bristles, and spines near
  their fore extremities; the longest and strongest of the spines
  are three in number, and form a kind of transverse row or comb at
  the extreme inner point on the upper side of each falx; besides
  these there is a row of short tooth-like spines on either margin of
  the furrow on the under side of each falx in which the fang lies
  concealed when at rest. The _Maxillæ_ are short and strong; the
  palpi issue from their extremity on the outer side, and the inner
  extremity is somewhat prominent and pointed.

  The _Labium_ is small, short, somewhat rectangular in form, and
  broader than high; the apex is a little rounded, and furnished with
  a single transverse row of small tooth-like spines.

  The _Sternum_ is somewhat subtriangular in form, much broader
  behind, where it is rounded on the outer angles.

  The _Abdomen_ is short oval, very convex above, where it is of a
  yellowish vinous brown colour, with a slightly darker longitudinal
  tapering, indistinct central stripe on the fore part; it is
  sparingly clothed with hairs, and the under side is of a pale dull
  yellowish colour; the spinners are four in number, and those of the
  superior pair are the strongest, three jointed and upturned.

  Adults and immature examples (all females) were found in tubular
  holes lined with silk and closed at the orifice with a strong solid
  hinged lid, shutting into the opening like a cork.

The portions of nests at B and C in Plate VII. also belong to
_Cteniza fodiens_, the latter being very similar to A in its
surroundings, but having a rather thinner door, slightly hollowed out
above (C 1). The smaller nest shown shut at B and open at B 1,[61]
is admirably concealed by mosses and lichens, some of which actually
grow upon the door, and here two minute trap-doors, belonging
to infantine examples of a distinct species of spider (_Nemesia
meridionalis_), are seen on the left hand below.

[Footnote 61: It must be clearly understood that when the doors are
represented as standing open or ajar this is unnatural, as they
always close by their own combined weight and elasticity.]

It is not rare to find small colonies of nests of the same or
distinct species grouped closely together in this way, though I
greatly doubt whether one can safely assume their sociability from
this fact.

I have very seldom seen nests on the flat ground, where the door
would lie horizontally when closed, a sloping or nearly vertical bank
being usually chosen, where the door will fall to by its own weight.

In the Ionian Islands another species or variety of _Cteniza_,
described under the name of _Cteniza (or Mygale) ionica_, and
represented as being of an uniform yellow-brown colour, is said to
make its nests in the earth of the terraces round the roots of the
olive trees.

Mr. Saunders[62] gives admirable figures and descriptions which show
us at once that these nests, which he discovered in rather elevated
situations in the island of Zante, are of the cork type; but, in
this case, the entire door does not shut flush with the surface, as
in ordinary cork nests, but has a short spur-like projection above
and behind the hinge, serving, as is conjectured, like a lever, by
pressing on which from the outside the lid may easily be raised.[63]
When I come to speak of the manner of constructing and repairing
nests I shall have occasion to refer to these nests again.

[Footnote 62: Sydney Smith Saunders. Description of a Species of
Mygale from Ionia, in Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1839, vol. iii. p.
160, Plate IX.]

[Footnote 63: I must own to some hesitation about accepting this
explanation, though I am not prepared to offer any other.]

I have not as yet found any nests on the Riviera which can be said to
correspond accurately with those of _Ct. ionica_, the only builders
of cork nests yet discovered in this district being _Cteniza fodiens_
and _Nemesia cæmentaria_.

This latter species is described by Mr. Pickard-Cambridge,[64] in the
following terms:--

[Footnote 64: See above, p. 88.]

                       Gen. Nemesia (Savigny).

  Nemesia cæmentaria. Plate IX.

  Syn. _Mygale cæmentaria_ (Latr.), _H. N. des Crust._ t. vii. p. 164.

  _M. cæmentaria_ (Walck), _Ins. Apt._ i. p. 135.

  Female adult, length 9 to 11 lines.

  _Cephalothorax_ rather elongate, oval, and somewhat truncated at
  each extremity; the caput is elevated and rounded on the sides and
  upper part, but less elevated than in _Cteniza_; the normal grooves
  and indentations are well marked, and the junction of the cephalic
  and thoracic segments is indicated by a strong deep impression or
  cleft, of a transverse, curved, or somewhat bent angular form, the
  curve or angle directed forwards. The colour of the cephalothorax
  is yellow-brown tinged with olive, the margins are paler, but
  have no distinctly defined marginal band. On the hinder part of
  the caput are three clear brown-yellow longitudinal stripes; the
  central one reaches from behind the two hind central eyes to the
  thoracic junction, the lateral ones converge a little to the same
  point, but do not reach nearly, in fact not much more than half
  way, to the eyes. The clypeus is of a clear brown-yellow colour
  also, and on either side of it (extending from each fore lateral
  eye), is an irregular patch of the same. The ocular region and
  clypeus are furnished with a few strongish black bristles, and the
  three yellow stripes above mentioned have a few more, those on the
  central stripe being the longest and strongest, and disposed in a
  single longitudinal row.

  The _Eyes_, eight in number, are seated on a transverse oval
  eminence, and form a rectangular figure, whose transverse diameter
  is double the length of its longitudinal diameter: their relative
  position is similar to that of _Cteniza_, but in the present
  species they are smaller than in _C. fodiens_: those of the hind
  central pair are the smallest of the eight, and each is very
  nearly contiguous to the hind lateral on its side; the interval
  between those of each lateral pair is small; the space between
  the two central eyes of the eight is equal to an eye's diameter,
  and each of these is separated from the hind central and fore
  lateral nearest to it by a similar interval. The _Legs_ are strong,
  moderately long, their relative length 4, 1, 3, 2?, but little
  difference is observable between 1, 3, and 2; they are furnished
  with hairs, bristles, and a few, not very strong, spines; each
  tarsus terminates with three curved claws, the two superior ones
  much the longest and strongest, and have a few small teeth near
  their base inside.

  The _Palpi_ are strong and similar in colour and armature to the
  legs; each is terminated with a curved black claw.

  _Falces_ strong, prominent, and rounded in the profile line;
  they are furnished with hairs, bristles, and strong tooth-like
  spines; the four strongest of these latter form a transverse row
  at the inner extremity of each; besides these there is a row of
  short tooth-like spines on the inner margin of the furrow on the
  underside of each falx, in which the fang lies concealed when at
  rest. The _Maxillæ_ are strong, with a small angular prominence at
  their inner extremities (when looked at from beneath), and each
  has three to four small dark-coloured teeth in a short, straight,
  obliquely transverse row at the base on the inner side. _Labium_
  broad but short, its breadth is double its height, and the upper
  corners are rounded off. The _Sternum_ is of a somewhat pentagonal
  form.

  _Abdomen_ rather elongate oval, tolerably, but not excessively,
  convex above; it is of a dull yellowish whitey-brown colour marked
  and mottled above with dark chestnut brown; the markings are rather
  irregular, but a general disposition in the form of a longitudinal
  central, and oblique lateral, stripes or bars may be traced on the
  hinder half; the superior spinners are short and three-jointed,
  those of the inferior pair are exceedingly minute.

  Adult females were found in nests similar to those of _Cteniza
  fodiens_.

The cork nests are the simplest form of nest, with the exception of
those described above from Jamaica, and have constituted, up to the
present time, the only type known in Europe. Their chief claims to
our admiration lie in the perfection of workmanship which the doors
usually exhibit, and the marvellous concealment which they afford
when closed. These doors as a rule fit so tightly [thanks to the
accurate adjustment of their sloping sides to the bevelled lip of
the tube which receives them,] that they afford a certain amount
of mechanical resistance, even when the spider is away. But, after
examining a very large series of these cork nests, I find that there
is some variation in the degree of perfection attained in their work
by different individuals of the same kind. The mechanical resistance
is greater or less in proportion to the thickness and weight of the
door, and to the slope of its sides, and of the bevelled edges of
the tube; and in each of these details a marked difference may be
observed.

One might suppose from what has so often been repeated as to the
habits of _N. cæmentaria_, that, whenever any one attempts to open
the door, the spider, which is always at home in the day time, would
dart up from the bottom of the tube and endeavour to keep it closed
by holding on from within.

[Illustration: _Plate VIII._]

I cannot say what may take place during the summer months; but from
October to May I have but rarely found one of these spiders ready to
oppose me, though _Nemesia meridionalis_ and _N. Eleanora_ frequently
did so. Many times, wishing to provoke them, I have tapped at the
door in order to apprise the occupant of my arrival, or lifted it and
let it fall again, and always in vain, though the spider was there,
crouching at the bottom of her tube.

Indeed I can only recall six or eight instances in which this spider
did hold down her door, and on three of these she was captured.

I will now relate what I saw on one of these occasions,[65] for there
has been much speculation as to the manner in which the spider clings
to the door and offers the determined resistance which is experienced.

[Footnote 65: Mrs. Boyle was the first to witness this curious sight,
and my description of the resistance of the spider is almost an exact
repetition of hers to me. It is curious also that, following her
indications, I found the very nest and spider on which she had made
her observations, and every detail recurred again though several days
had elapsed between her visit and mine.]

No sooner had I gently touched the door with the point of a penknife
than it was drawn slowly downwards, with a movement which reminded
me of the tightening of a limpet on a sea-rock, so that the crown
which at first projected a little way above, finally lay a little
below the surface of the soil. I then contrived to raise the door
very gradually, despite the strenuous efforts of the occupant, till
at length I was just able to see into the nest, and to distinguish
the spider holding on to the door with all her might, lying back
downwards, with her fangs and all her claws driven into the silk
lining of the under surface of the door. The body of the spider was
placed across, and filled up, the tube, the head being away from
the hinge, and she obtained an additional purchase in this way by
blocking up the entrance.

I did not force the spider to release her hold, but, by a rapid
stroke with a long-bladed knife, cut out the upper part of the tube
with the surrounding mass of soil, and thus secured the trap-door and
its owner. This specimen is represented at fig. C, Plate VIII., where
the pin-point holes made by the claws may be seen in pairs round the
whole circumference of the flatter portion of the lower surface of
the door except on the side next to the hinge.

Whenever a spider resists in this way she must make these holes, but
I have very rarely seen them in other nests; this may perhaps be
accounted for by their having been effaced by the action of moisture
which would stretch the silk. However this may be, this specimen
showed the claw marks quite distinctly on my return to England after
the lapse of several weeks.

Much has been written about these marks, which are frequently spoken
of as holes purposely made in the silk in order to give the spider a
better purchase. It has also been stated that two holes may be seen
in the silk of the tube near the mouth on the side away from the
hinge, but these I have never been able to find. The door of nest A
in Plate VIII. is rather abnormal, as it is made up of two doors, the
smaller one being spun into the top of the one now in use. This is,
I believe, an abnormal and rather clumsy example of the ordinary way
of enlarging the nest, but of this we shall see more when we come to
speak of the construction and repairing of these nests generally.

Fig. B in this plate represents a moss-covered sod pierced by the
tube of a nest, the door of which is entirely concealed from view,
and only discovered when opened as at B 1.

This nest was found accidentally by Mr. Robert Lightbody, who
kindly brought it to me, its presence having been betrayed by the
tube, which he happened to cut through in digging up a plant. The
moss on the door grew as vigorously, and had in every way the same
appearance, as that which was rooted in the surrounding earth; and so
perfect was the deception that I found it impossible to detect the
position of the closed trap even when holding it in my hand. There
can be no doubt that many nests escape observation in this way, and
the artifice is the more surprising because there is strong reason to
believe that this beautiful door-garden is deliberately planted with
moss by the spider, and not the effect of a mere chance growth. I
shall adduce evidence in support of this statement by-and-by.

I alluded to the nest C (Plate VIII.) when speaking of the claw
marks which it exhibits, and that figured at D and D 1 in this plate
is merely an instance of a good example of this type. I have taken
nests of _N. cæmentaria_ both at Cannes and Mentone, and have little
doubt that this species will be discovered at many points along the
Riviera. I detected two abandoned nests of the cork type, which I
fully expect had belonged to _N. cæmentaria_, in an enclosed space
called the Campagne de Garonne in Marseilles itself. These nests lay
in the little mound of undisturbed earth between the divided trunks
of the small olive-trees, and I do not doubt that if I had had time
to search I should have discovered more nests, and perhaps others
which were still tenanted.

We now turn from the single-door nests to those with double doors,
and from the well known to the new types of structure.

In these we have a thin and wafer-like door at the mouth of the
nest, and from two to four inches lower down, a second and solid
underground door. These lower doors are characteristic of the
nests to which they belong, that of the branched nest (_Nemesia
meridionalis_, Plate IX.) being long and more or less tongue-shaped,
while that of the unbranched double-door nest (_N. Eleanora_, Plate
XII. p. 106) is somewhat horse-shoe shaped.

The surface doors of these two kinds of nest do not appear to
differ, and, though rather thinner, may be compared to those of the
single-door wafer kind from Jamaica.

The commonest form at Mentone is the branched nest, which may be
found in abundance in many of the loosely-built walls of the lemon
and olive terraces or on sloping banks, but they are rarely to be met
with on flat ground.

In the nests of _Nemesia meridionalis_ the tube, instead of being
simple, as it is in all other known nests, is invariably branched,
a second tube joining the first at the point where the lower door
is hung and forming with it an angle of about 45°. The main tube
descends and is frequently curved, or sometimes doubly bent like the
spout of a tea-kettle (A, Plate X. p. 100), while the branch ascends,
and in some few instances reaches the surface, though it is usually a
_cul de sac_ (Plate IX.)

[Illustration: _Plate IX._]

In the exceptional cases where the nests have two superficial
openings, one of the two surface doors always appears neglected and
going to decay, or is covered with earth which chokes the upper part
of its tube. The explanation of this probably is that the spider
found the original entrance blocked up or in some way unfitted for
use, and then prolonged what was the blind branch until it reached
the surface and replaced the former doorway. However this may be it
is certain that in the great majority of nests it will be found that
the branch ends in the earth, and is a _cul de sac_, and this I have
invariably observed to be the case in the nests of very young spiders
of this species (fig. B, Plate IX.)

The tube is frequently enlarged at the mouth, and forms a spreading
lip which the surface door is usually large enough to cover (A 1,
Plate IX.)

In these branched double-door nests the upper door does not fit into,
but merely lies upon, the mouth of the tube, the elasticity of the
hinge and its own weight being sufficient to keep it closed. The
lower door is suspended by a hinge placed at the apex of the angle
formed by the bifurcation of the tube, and is hung in such a manner
that it can either be pushed upwards so as to lie diagonally across
and block the main tube, or be drawn back so as to fit into and close
the entrance to the branch.

This will, I think, best be understood by reference to the drawings
of a small nest of this type given at B 1 and B 2 in Plate XI. p.
105, where the second door is shown in its two positions. This lower
door is from 1 to 1-1/2 lines thick, channeled above, but nearly
flat on the back, and of an elliptic form, with a loose appendage
at its lower end, the whole being made of earth enclosed in a case
of silk.[66] When the lower door is drawn back so as to close and
conceal the entrance to the branch, it lies in the same plane, and
closely corresponds in curvature with the lining of the main tube and
almost appears to form part of it (fig. A, Plate X. p. 100, and fig.
B 1, Plate XI. p. 105).

[Footnote 66: Since writing the above I have learned, thanks to a
better method which I have recently adopted for preserving the nests
for examination, that sometimes the lower door, instead of being free
within the tube and only attached to the lining by the hinge, is
surrounded on either side by a delicate silk web, which extends from
either edge of its lower surface to the silk walls of the tube below
and forms a sort of double gusset. This admits of the movement of the
lower door in the way described above, but perhaps serves, together
with the solid appendage at the extremity of the free end of the door
(that away from the hinge), to prevent the door from being driven too
far in an upward direction and thus becoming so tightly jammed as to
make the spider a prisoner in her own nest. I think it possible that
the lower door is always attached to the tube in this way, but, as
it parts readily from the silk on either side when the earth which
supports the tube is removed, it very frequently appears to be free,
as I have represented it in Plates IX., X., and XI.]

When digging out these nests, after carefully removing the upper
portion, I have frequently seen the lower door move across and block
up the main tube in a mysterious manner, it being in reality pushed
by the spider from below, and she may sometimes be captured at her
post with her back set against the door. More frequently, when the
spider finds that resistance is hopeless and sees the earth crumbling
in, she drops to the bottom of her nest and lies there helpless, with
her legs folded against her body like an embryonic creature; some,
however, more savage than their neighbours, fly out and strike at the
intruder with their fangs.

[Illustration: _Plate X._]

What then, it may be asked, is the use of the branch? I do not think
that we can draw any safe conclusion from what takes place when we
dig out a spider, as to what would occur if she were besieged by one
of her natural enemies, such as ichneumons, sand-wasps, centipedes
(_Scolopendra_), small lizards &c.[67]

[Footnote 67: For some account of the principal enemies of spiders
generally, see p. 134.]

Let us suppose, however, that one of these creatures has found
its way into the nest and is crawling down the tube. What will
probably happen? Why, in the first place, the spider will slam the
second door in the face of the intruder, and then, if worsted in
the pushing match which follows, quickly draw this door back again
and run up into the safety branch, when the enemy, after descending
precipitately to the bottom of the main tube, will look in vain for
the spider as it searches on its way up for the secret passage now
closed by its trap-door. This is but a purely imaginary case, and it
may be that the branch has some wholly different purpose.

It seems very improbable, however, that it should be mainly intended
as a safety place for the eggs or offspring; at least if this were
the case we should not expect to find it, as we do, in the nests of
very young spiders (fig. B, Plate IX.), which could have no use for
it.

The large spider and its nest figured at A and A 3 in Plate
IX. were taken at Mentone on March 17, 1872, and the following
is the technical description of the species, written by Mr.
Pickard-Cambridge:--

  Nemesia Meridionalis. Plate IX.

  Syn. _Mygale meridionalis_ (Costa). _Fauna del Regno di Napoli_, p.
  14, Pl. I., figs. 1-4, ad partem.

  Female adult, length 11 to 13 lines.

  This spider is very nearly allied to _N. cæmentaria_ both in
  general structure and colours, but it may be distinguished by
  the more elongate form both of the cephalothorax and abdomen;
  the colours also of the present species are more distinctly
  distributed; a well-defined narrow marginal band, irregular on
  the inside, surrounds the thorax; and the caput has a large
  curved patch of the same on either side of the ocular area,
  with a broad tapering band tinged with orange, which runs from
  immediately behind the eyes to the thoracic junction, where it
  ends in a point. The transverse diameter of the ocular area is
  also less in proportion to its longitudinal diameter than in _N.
  cæmentaria_, and the eyes are all smaller, but placed on a similar
  oval eminence, and several bristles are directed forwards from
  the middle of the lower margin of the clypeus, while one or two
  others are found in the ocular area, and three or four more (long,
  strong, and nearly erect) form a longitudinal row along the middle
  of the central tapering thoracic band. The _Falces_ are deeply
  yellow-brown, with two to three elongate oval patches or short
  longitudinal parallel bands on their upper sides; in their armature
  the falces are similar to those of _N. cæmentaria_. The _Labium_
  appeared to be less broad in proportion to its height, and the
  _Sternum_ smaller and of a more oval form than in that species. The
  _Abdomen_ is similarly marked, though the chocolate-brown markings
  appeared to be less deep and dense, being more broken up, but still
  forming several fairly defined, bold, and broad angular bars or
  chevrons on the upper side. The inferior spinners, though small
  (like most of the corresponding pair in species of this family),
  are yet considerably stronger than in _N. cæmentaria_.

  Adult females of this spider were found in tubular silk-lined
  holes in the earth, closed at the external orifice with a flat
  scale-like hinged lid, covered with lichens and mosses. Not quite
  half way down this tube is a tubular branch running off upwards
  at an angle of 45° or less; the main tube also at this point is
  furnished with an elliptical-hinged valve, with which the spider
  appears to have the power to close the entrance to the branch or
  to shut off the upper part of the main tube. This branch (found
  also in the tubes of very young examples) seems to be certainly
  a strong distinguishing character in the economy of the species,
  and separates it at once from _N. cæmentaria_. In the nest of _N.
  meridionalis_ the tube also projects at times above the surface
  of the soil upwards among the herbage which serves to conceal it.
  Costa appears to have had before him this latter species as well as
  what is here taken as the typical _N. meridionalis_, as he speaks
  of the nests under his observation as being frequently branched,
  while his description would suit both species; his figure, however,
  more nearly agrees in the thoracic pattern with the spider above
  described. Ausserer, in his elaborate paper on the Mygalides,
  lately published (_Beiträge_ &c. vide supra), appears to have
  overlooked _M. meridionalis_ (Costa) altogether; while Canestrini
  and Pavesi (_Catal. degli Araneidi italiani_ in _Atti Soc. Ital.
  Sc. Nat._ xi. (1869)), p. 25, include it under the synonyms of _M.
  fodiens_ Walck., from which it is undoubtedly distinct, as may be
  seen at once, even if it were only by the difference in the form
  and structure of the lid with which the external orifice of the
  tubular nest is closed.

In the case of the upper door of these branched nests, as there
is but a very thin coating of earth on their upper surface, it is
rare to find any of the larger mosses or lichens growing upon them;
but, as if to compensate for this deficiency, a variety of foreign
materials are employed which are scarcely ever found in cork doors,
such as dead leaves, bits of stick, roots, straw of grasses, &c., and
I have even seen freshly-cut green leaves, apparently gathered for
the purpose, spun into a door which had recently been constructed.

But here again there is the widest possible difference between nest
and nest in the degree of perfection in their concealment; and,
although as a rule the surface of the upper door harmonizes well with
the general appearance of its surroundings, there are some individual
nests in which it readily catches the eye and even attracts attention.

Thus, I have seen nests in mossy banks where the doors, being made
of nothing but earth and silk, showed distinctly as brown patches
against the green; and those doors which are covered with earth only,
even when they are surrounded by earth, are often easily detected,
because when they dry up, as they quickly do, they become much paler
in colour than the earth of the bank, which retains its moisture.

Perhaps in no case is the concealment more complete than when dead
leaves are employed to cover the door. In some cases a single
withered olive leaf only is spun in and suffices to cover the trap;
in others, several are woven together with bits of wood and roots, as
in the accompanying woodcut, which represents different views of the
upper door of the nest which is drawn in Plate X. p. 100.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: _Plate XI._]

In this nest another interesting feature presents itself, for here
the tube projects a short way beyond the surface of the ground and
is hardened and coated with earth and fine gravel in such a way that
it requires no other support. This is not commonly the case, and may
perhaps be the result of a contrivance to meet the necessities of
a nest which has had the surface earth washed away from it. But I
have frequently observed nests in which the upper part of the tube
is carried up for two or three inches through grass, moss, ferns,
pellitory, or the like, the stems of the sheltering plants being
interwoven with and made to support the tube.[68] In every case
the second door, which is designed for resistance and requires a
firm-walled tube into which it may be wedged, is below ground, and
for the same reason we scarcely ever find cork nests constructed with
any part of the tube projecting beyond the surface of the soil.

[Footnote 68: This aërial portion of the tube corresponds with that
of _Atypus piceus_ described above (p. 78), but differs in having its
aperture closed by a door.]

At fig. A, Plate XI., one of these branched nests is seen concealed
in a plant of ceterach fern, and here the tube is raised a short way
above the soil; while in fig. B of the same plate the common form is
represented, the upper door lying flat on the surface of the ground,
from which, thanks to its covering of small mosses, it is scarcely to
be distinguished.

The figs. B 1 and B 2 show this door open and the lower door in its
two positions.

Now that attention has been drawn to the existence of this new type
of nest, I fully expect that _Nemesia meridionalis_ will be found at
many points along the Riviera and in the whole Mediterranean region,
but I have hitherto only discovered it at Mentone and Cannes. Mrs.
Boyle saw one of these nests in the Pallavicini gardens near Genoa,
and there seems every reason to believe that certain nests which have
been detected near Naples and in Ischia, will, when better known, be
found to be of the branched double-door type.

It seems probable that our spider belongs to the species which
was first described by M. Costa,[69] under the name of _Mygale
meridionalis_, though, if we are to rely implicitly on the figures
and detailed account given by this naturalist, we must suppose that
it constructs a different nest in Southern Italy from that which it
makes on the Riviera, and one which, although it agrees in most other
respects, is destitute of the characteristic subterranean door.

[Footnote 69: Fauna del Regno di Napoli, (vol. containing _Animali
Articolati_, classe ii. Aracnidi: incomplete, Naples, 1861), p. 14,
tab. i. figs. 1-4. See Appendix A.]

It is more likely, however, that M. Costa has overlooked the
existence of the lower door, though it is strange that he should have
done so, as he says that the nests "sometimes have a double aperture,
and the upper portions of the burrows meet and anastomose at about
two inches distance," thus showing that he was aware that the tube is
branched.

One more nest only now remains to be described, and this is
again an example of a new type--namely, of that which I have
distinguished as the unbranched double door (Plate XII.), the work
of _Nemesia Eleanora_. This nest is never branched, and its second
and subterranean door is situated from one to four inches below
the surface door, and only serves to close the one tube which is
narrowed above the insertion of this lower door. Here, as in the
branched nest, the thin and wafer-like surface door appears to serve
principally for concealment and the lower one for resistance. This
latter, made out of earth encased in strong white silk, is from
one to two lines thick, and has, at the end away from the hinge, a
similar appendage to that found in the lower door of the branched
nest. This appendage serves, I imagine, as a kind of ear by which the
door, when firmly jammed into the tube on the approach of an enemy,
may be pulled down again as soon as the alarm is over. As in the
branched nest it has the upper surface concave and the lower slightly
rounded, so that when drawn back and not in use it may not obstruct
the passage. The sides of this lower door slope a little, so that
the crown is smaller than the base; and this is important, because
it causes the door to fit more tightly when driven upwards into the
tube, acting on the principle of an inverted cork door.

[Illustration: _Plate XII._]

In form this door is somewhat elliptic, but much broader and shorter
than the second door of the branched nest, and it is frequently of
a nearly horse-shoe shaped outline. The second door of the branched
nest is necessarily longer, having to perform the double function of
closing the opening to the branch and the passage of the main tube.

In either case, however, these doors will be found to be more or less
elliptic, and this is necessarily so, for, lying as they do when in
use in a plane which cuts the subcylindrical tube obliquely, they
have to fill a somewhat elliptical area.[70]

[Footnote 70: The lower door here, as in the branched nest (see
above, p. 100), is sometimes united to the silk of the tube below by
two nearly triangular gussets of silk, when, instead of being free
except at the hinge, as I have represented it (Plate XII.), it is
surrounded on either side by silk and only free at the extremity away
from the hinge. This does not, however, alter the function of this
door in any way.

It may be that these lower doors are always attached from below
in this way, but it is very difficult to be sure of this, as they
readily break away from the surrounding silk, when they appear quite
free, as in my drawing. It was not until I adopted the plan of
stuffing the tube full of cotton wool before removing the surrounding
earth that I detected this fragile attachment.]

I have observed some variation as to the exact proportions of these
doors, and it is quite possible that in many cases they are specially
adapted to meet peculiarities in the curvature of the tube.

The nest and spider drawn at figs. A and A 3 of Plate XII. were first
discovered by the Honourable Mrs. Richard Boyle at Mentone, on March
26th, 1872, and the following is the description of the species
kindly prepared by Mr. Pickard-Cambridge:--

  Nemesia Eleanora, sp. nov. Plate XII.

  Female adult, length 11 to 12 lines.

  This spider, which has (like _N. meridionalis_) probably been
  confused with its near ally _N. cæmentaria_, is yet easily
  distinguished from both by its deeper and richer colouring, as well
  as by other characters.

  The _Abdomen_ has a far more spotted appearance; in some examples
  a similar series of dark, broken, slightly angular bars is
  indistinctly visible on the hinder half of the upper side; in
  others (the more common type) the darker colouring preponderates,
  and some transverse, broken, slightly angular, or nearly curved
  bars or lines of pale spots constitute the pattern; the lateral
  margins of the thorax are not so distinctly yellow as in _N.
  meridionalis_, and there is a single longitudinal stripe on the
  caput, of a dull orange-yellow brown, commencing directly behind
  the eyes and tapering to the thoracic junction; the depression
  or pit at this point is more strongly marked than in either of
  the two foregoing species; the ocular area is also smaller, and
  its transverse diameter is less in proportion to its width; the
  bristles on the margin of the clypeus, as also those within the
  ocular area and in the central longitudinal line of the caput, are
  similarly disposed to those in _N. meridionalis_, but are more
  numerous; in some details, however, of form and structure--viz.,
  the Labium and Sternum--the present species is more nearly allied
  to _N. meridionalis_ than to _N. cæmentaria_. The _Legs_ seemed
  to be rather longer and stronger than in either; the tarsi and
  metatarsi of the two first pairs, as well as the digital joints of
  the palpi, are rather densely clothed a little underneath on their
  outer sides with a kind of fringe or pad of close-set hairs; in
  other respects the armature of the legs appeared to be similar to
  that of the other two species, except that in the present one there
  are three _short strong red-brown spines in a longitudinal row on
  the outer sides of the genual joints of the third pair_; these
  spines were plainly visible in all the examples found, but did not
  exist in any one of those of the two former species. The armature
  of the falces, which are of a uniform yellow-brown colour, is
  similar to that of those species.

  Adult females were found in tubular silk-lined unbranched holes,
  closed at the orifice with a flat scale-like hinged lid concealed
  by mosses and lichens, and having a horse-shoe shaped second valve
  or door less than half way down the tube, of which it serves
  to shut off the upper part. In this nest, as in that of _N.
  meridionalis_, the upper part of the tube often projects above the
  surface of the soil.

[Illustration: Nemesia Eleanora ♂ Adult, natural size.]

  Since the above description of the female of this species was
  written, an example of the adult male has been most opportunely
  discovered. It is much smaller than the female, its length being
  only six lines. The _Cephalothorax_ is of an uniform clear
  yellow-brown colour, tinged with orange, and thinly clothed with
  a greyish pubescence: the oblique indentations marking the union
  of the cephalic and thoracic segments are indicated by a strongish
  black-brown band on either side, which becomes obsolete as each
  approaches the other near the central curved indentation; there
  are also two or three converging suffused blackish stripes on the
  hinder slope. The relative length of the _Legs_ is the same in both
  sexes, 4, 1, 2, 3, but in the male those of the fourth are longer
  in proportion to those of the third pair than in the female; the
  spines also on the legs are more numerous and stronger, the upper
  sides of the femora of all the legs are deeply suffused with black,
  while in the female this suffusion is not nearly of so marked a
  character, though the genua of the different females examined
  had a strong brown-black macula on the outer side of each, while
  the corresponding maculæ in the single male examined were but
  just visible; the three spines observed on the outer side of the
  genua of the third pair of legs in the female are of even a more
  marked character in the male, and hence they may be considered a
  good and tangible specific difference from other nearly allied
  species; the tibiæ of the first pair are considerably enlarged on
  the under side at the fore extremity, where each is armed with
  a single, longish, strong, slightly curved, pointed black spine
  directed forwards (fig. _a_, 3). The _Abdomen_ is small and of an
  oval form; its colours and markings resemble those of the female,
  but on the hinder half of the upper side two or three indistinctly
  traced pale angular bars or chevrons are formed by the distribution
  of the black-brown colours and markings; the under side of the
  abdomen is of a uniform pale whitish yellow, except the spiracular
  plates, which are yellow-brown. The _Palpi_ are moderately long
  and strong; the radial joint is longer than the cubital, and is of
  a tumid and somewhat oval form, suffused over most of its surface
  with dark brown, the rest of the palpus being of a yellowish-brown
  colour; the digital joint is small and somewhat oblong-oval, curved
  downwards, and very slightly concave on its inside; the palpal
  organs consist of a nearly globular, basal, corneous bulb prolonged
  into a strongish, curved, but not very long, pear-stem form, the
  stem being distinctly cleft or bifid at its extreme point (_vide_
  figs. _a_ 1, and _a_ 2), one portion of the bifid part is larger
  than the other, though both are equal in length, and the stem of
  the palpal bulb is directed transversely outwards, almost at right
  angles with the digital joint.

  Until the discovery of the male spider now described, and which is,
  without doubt, the male sex of the female described immediately
  before, this latter was thought to be the female of _Nemesia
  Manderstjernæ_ (Ausserer), and it had indeed been so determined
  by Professor Ausserer himself. But the form of the palpal organs
  differs so decidedly from those of _N. Manderstjernæ_ (Ausserer,
  _Beiträge ... der Territelariæ, Verhandl. Z. B. Gesllsch_: Wien,
  1871, Bd. xxi. p. 170), that all doubts as to the present being
  a distinct (and as it is believed to be) a hitherto undescribed
  species, are removed. From M. Ausserer's description, the
  pear shaped stem of the palpal bulb in _N. Manderstjernæ_ is
  comparatively slender, ending in a fine and uncleft point, whereas,
  in _N. Eleanora_, the stem is strong and its extremity cleft: other
  differences are also observable in the two spiders, but this one is
  well marked and the most tangible.

  The specific name, _Eleanora_, now conferred upon the species, is
  taken from the Christian name of the Hon. Mrs. Boyle, reference
  to whom has been before made, and of whose kind exertions some
  acknowledgment is thus permanently recorded.

In fig. A, Plate XII., the upper door, which, if closed, would be
entirely hidden by the long filmy mosses which surround and cover it,
is represented open; but it should be clearly understood that this is
artificial and not natural, as in reality these doors close of their
own accord by means of their weight and the elasticity of the hinge.
It will be seen that living mosses of two kinds are worked into the
upper surface of this door, which was admirably concealed. (fig. A 1,
Plate XII.).

It is chiefly in the absence of the branch and the different form
of the lower door that the nest of _Nemesia Eleanora_ differs from
that of _N. meridionalis_; and, as they inhabit the same localities,
it is only when one has dug down as far as the lower door that it
can be known to which of the two species the nest belongs. When once
this point is reached however, all doubt is at an end; for in this
case the unbranched double-door nest differs from the branched in a
way which any child could realize, though the respective spiders are
not very dissimilar when seen with the naked eye alone. This affords
a good instance of the benefit which may accrue to a collector from
a study of the habits of the creatures which he collects, for it is
certain that it was the nest in this case which first proclaimed the
distinctness of its tenant.

_Nemesia Eleanora_ is rather less common at Mentone than _N.
meridionalis_, but at Cannes I found the reverse to be the case. At
the latter place, on the northern slope of the little hill of St.
Cassien, branched and unbranched double-door nests may, however, be
found in tolerable abundance, the traps being frequently concealed by
fallen leaves from the cork oaks, which are woven into their upper
surface.

The nest of _N. Eleanora_ often has the upper part of the tube
prolonged above the surface of the ground and carried up through
mosses, grasses, and the like.

An example of this is seen in figs. B and B 1, Plate XII., in which
the upper part of the tube is represented with the surface door open
in the one case and shut in the other.

The concealment here was so complete that I should never have
discovered the nest but for the merest accident. I happened to
want some moss to lay with flowers in my botanical tin, and in one
handful which I plucked up this trap-door lay concealed. It should be
observed that the upper part of the tube and its surface door were
covered with growing moss, and this moss must have lived exclusively
upon the moisture which the very damp and shady situation afforded,
as there was no earth mixed with the silk.

When digging out the nests of _N. Eleanora_, I have frequently seen
the lower doors pushed forwards so as to close the tube; and it is
my belief that the spider, after having thus barred the passage,
puts her back against the door and resists in this way. I must own,
however, that, though I believe I have seen the spider in this
attitude when I have severed the tube from below, I am not quite
certain about it.

I have twice in the months of April and May, and frequently in
October and November, found young of this species in the nests with
their mother. Usually they were all very small and not larger than
that represented at fig. B 2, Plate IX., p. 98, but occasionally
in October I have found two or three young spiders thrice the size
of their companions still in the nest. On one occasion (in April) I
found twenty-four small spiders clustered beneath and beside their
mother.[71] I secured the whole family by quickly cutting out the
mass of earth containing the lower door on the under side of which
they remained crouched, and brought them home alive. I had up to
this time been in the habit of killing the spiders by placing them
in a stopper bottle full of strong spirit of wine, but on treating
these spiders in this way I saw reason to regret having done so. I
knew that these large spiders, when thrown into spirit of wine, would
continue to struggle for an hour or more, spasmodically spreading
out their legs as if swimming; but I had supposed that this was only
muscular motion, and was not in the least aware that the unfortunate
creatures were probably conscious all the while. In this instance I
first placed the mother spider in the bottle, and then, after the
lapse of about ten minutes, when I supposed that the spider, though
still struggling, was dead to sense, I dropped in the young spiders.
No sooner, however, had I done this than the mother, perceiving them,
gathered all her young to her, and, after placing them beneath her,
with her legs drawn up round them, as a hen screens her chickens with
her wings, never stirred again, and retained this attitude until
death released her, and the limbs, no longer under the control of
this wonderful maternal resolution, slackened and fell abroad.[72]

[Footnote 71: I have found similar families in October and November
in the nests of _N. meridionalis_, only all the young were of nearly
uniform size, and very small. On November 21 I dug out a mother
spider of this species (_meridionalis_) with forty-one little ones!]

[Footnote 72: My own impression is that this act was one of
conscious protection on the part of the mother spider; but Mr.
Pickard-Cambridge doubts this, and would attribute the action to the
tendency which spiders commonly display to clutch at any material
object when dying in this way.]

I need scarcely say that the small spiders were killed by the spirit
in a very few instants, but it is almost certain that the mother was
alive and conscious for half an hour. Now this pain can easily be
spared by placing large spiders for about ten minutes in a closed box
with a piece of cotton wool steeped in chloroform beside them, before
dropping them into the spirit of wine, a system which I have since
that day adopted and found to answer perfectly.

I examined these young spiders carefully, hoping to detect some
males among them, but the males, though they differ markedly from
the females when adult in their smaller size and curiously enlarged
palpi, do not appear to afford any distinctive mark at this early
period. It appeared that these spiders had been but recently hatched,
for some among them were still semi-transparent.

I have never found young spiders in the nests of _Cteniza fodiens_ or
_Nemesia cæmentaria_.

M. de Walckenaer[73] quotes a statement made by M. Rossi to the
effect that _Cteniza fodiens_ carries its young on her back, as
certain species of _Lycosa_ (Tarantula) do. He points out the
interest which would attach to this observation if confirmed, as
showing a similarity in habit between the two groups, which are
otherwise nearly related.

[Footnote 73: Walckenaer (C. A. de), Les Aranéides de France (date?),
p. 5.]

Observations of this kind are difficult to make satisfactorily,
at least in the case of the trap-door spiders with which I am
acquainted, and which appear to be nocturnal in their habits. I have
certainly never seen them out of their nests in the daytime, and but
rarely detected one of them (_Nemesia cæmentaria_) even venturing to
peer out of her door set ajar for the purpose.[74]

[Footnote 74: M. Olivier, however, states (Encyclopédie Méthodique,
tom xviii., p. 228, Art. Araignées Mineuses, Paris, 1811) that he has
twice found nests in the islands off Hyères and on the promontory of
St. Tropez the doors of which were set open in the daytime and the
tube empty, this seeming to imply that the spiders were out hunting
and were diurnal in their habits. He did not see the spiders, but
from his description the nest was of the cork type.... Here is an
interesting point, and one which those naturalists who make Hyères
the field of their observations should endeavour to throw further
light upon.]

The following very singular account is given by M. Erber[75] of the
habits of _Cteniza ariana_, which he watched in the island of Tinos.
I quote from the abstract given in the _Zoological Record_ cited
below:--"At night these spiders come out of their nests, fasten the
open trap-door to neighbouring objects, and spin a net, about six
inches long by scarcely half an inch in height. In the morning the
nets were removed, and Erber believes that the net of each night is
added to the trap-door. He found eggs at the bottom of the tubes,
attached singly to threads, to the number of about sixty. The young
seem to form dwellings very early."

[Footnote 75: In Verhandlungen der k. k. zool. bot. Gesellschaft in
Wien, vol. xviii. pp. 905, 906, quoted in _Zoological Record_, vol.
v. p. 175 (1868); see also Appendix B.]

It would be very interesting to know whether these nocturnal habits
are also found in our spiders on the Riviera.

I have been favoured[76] with a sight of an unpublished manuscript
by Mr. Hansard giving an account of his observations on _Cteniza
fodiens_, made in Corfu. This gentleman states that some of these
spiders which he kept in captivity, used to come out at night, and
might sometimes be surprised roaming about the room at a very early
hour in the morning. He, however, relates that he had received from
a friend an account of a trap-door spider inhabiting the island of
Formosa, in the China seas, which constructed nests similar to those
of _Cteniza fodiens_, but which were habitually to be seen outside
their nests in the daytime, attracting attention by "staring at" any
one who might approach, and then hurrying back to their nests and
closing their doors after them.

[Footnote 76: I am indebted to Mr. Moseley for procuring this MS.,
and to Prof. Rolleston, whose property it is, for permission to make
use of it.]

Lady Parker has also told me of some black trap-door spiders which
were so common about Paramatta, near Sydney, in Australia, that
scarcely any one paid attention to them, and which might habitually
be seen out on the garden paths in the daytime near their holes,
to which they would run in all haste when alarmed. The eye of the
passer-by was attracted by the open doors, which were about the size
of a sixpence, and fall over backwards when the spider makes her
exit, but when closed, on her return, they fit so neatly that it is
extremely difficult to detect them.

It will, perhaps, have been observed that I have throughout spoken of
the female spider only, scarcely any allusion having been made to the
male. The truth is that, though I have carefully searched for them,
I have never been able to secure more than a single male spider.[77]
During the winter, spring, and late autumn (October) the female
appears to live solitary, in the daytime at least, and the male
probably hides in the crevices of old walls and in similar places. I
have diligently turned over piles of stone, greatly to the annoyance
of many little scorpions, but have never secured, or even seen,
another male spider. This is the more to be regretted as the species
of trap-door spider are much better characterized in the male than in
the female sex, the bulb-like enlargement which is found at the end
of the palpi in the former taking on a great variety of forms, each
of which is distinctive.

[Footnote 77: Three days before sending this MS. to print, and long
after the plates had been completed, I captured on Oct. 23rd one male
of _Nemesia Eleanora_. He lay crouched in a crevice in a mossy bank,
and had, perhaps, been driven out of some deeper hiding-place by the
heavy rains.]

M. de Walckenaer[78] says:--"C'est toujours pendant la nuit que
ces aranéides travaillent à leurs habitations et courent après
leur proie. C'est en Août que la Mygale maçonne (_Nemesia_--or
_Mygale_--_cæmentaria_) atteint toute sa grosseur.... En Septembre
elle devient mère et méchante en même temps ... les mouches, les
moucherons, les petits vers lui servent de pâture; elle les prend
dans les filets qu'elle étend et attache sur les inégalités des
terres voisines de sa demeure. Elle vit après la ponte en société
avec son mâle. Dorthès a vu plusieurs fois, dans la même habitation,
le mâle et la femelle avec une trentaine de petits."

[Footnote 78: Les Aranéides de France, p. 4.]

Any one, therefore, who has an opportunity of examining the nests
during the early autumn, might perhaps, discover the happy families
spoken of by M. Dorthès, but which it has never been my good fortune
to see. It is not known positively whether the male spider ever
assists in the construction of the nest, but, as we know that the
female is able to make it without his aid, there seems no reason to
suppose that he does.

I have seen the female _Nemesia meridionalis_ construct a trap-door
in captivity, after having been placed on a flower-pot full of earth
in which I had made a cylindrical hole.[79] She quickly disappeared
into this hole, and, during the night following the day of her
capture, she made a thin web over the aperture, into which she
wove any materials which came to hand. The trap-door at this stage
resembled a rudely constructed, horizontal, geometrical web, attached
by two or three threads to the earth at the mouth of the hole, while
in this web were caught the bits of earth, roots, moss, leaves &c.
which the spider had thrown into it from above. After the second
night the door appeared nearly of the normal texture and thickness,
but in no case would it open completely, and it seemed that the
spider was too much disgusted with her quarters to think it worth
while to make a perfect door. I believe that when a door is finished
the few threads which served as supports and connected it with the
earth on either side of the hinge are severed, and this is borne out
by the following instance. While I was at work one evening drawing
the spider's nest concealed in the plant of ceterach fern (Plate
XI., fig. A, p. 105) which I had dug out for the purpose, I detected
something moving at the mouth of a tiny hole [just large enough to
admit a crowquill pen] in the mass of earth on the opposite side of
the fern, to that in which the large trap-door lay.

[Footnote 79: An account of further experiments with captive spiders
will be found in Appendix G.]

The lamp-light fell full upon it, and I soon saw that the moving
object was a very small spider, not bigger than that drawn at B 2
in Plate IX., which was at work in the mouth of its tube. Whether
I had, in removing this mass of earth, destroyed the door I cannot
say, but it is certain that the opening of the tube was completely
uncovered, and it soon became apparent that the little spider was
intent upon remedying this deficiency. After a few threads had been
spun from side to side of the tube I watched the spider make one or
two hasty sorties, apparently spinning all the while, and finally I
saw her gather up an armful, as it were, of earth and lay this on the
web. After this the occupant of the tube was concealed, but I could
see from the movement of the particles of earth that they were being
consolidated, and that the weaving of the under surface of the door
was being completed. Next morning I was able to lift up the door,
which had the form of a small cup of silk, in which the earth lay. It
was then soft and pliant, but in ten days time it had hardened and
become a very fair specimen of a minute cork door (see figs. A 1, A
2, of Plate XI.).

On one occasion a captive _Nemesia meridionalis_ employed some pieces
of scarlet braid which I had purposely strewed, along with bits of
moss and fragments of leaves, in a circle round the opening of, and
about two inches away from, the hole.

It is probable that these spiders have in times past learned by
experience that they cannot do better than take such materials as
come to hand, as these will ordinarily serve for the concealment of
their door.

However, these trap-door spiders do seem to exercise some
discrimination in the choice of materials; for I have observed
several instances in which, when the door of a cork nest has been
removed, if the door was originally covered with moss, moss will
again be used in its reconstruction, even though the mouth of the
tube be then surrounded by bare earth.

Thus, for example, in one case where I had cut out a little clod of
mossy earth, about two inches thick and three square on the surface,
containing the top of the tube and the moss-covered cork door of _N.
cæmentaria_, I found, on revisiting the place six days later, that a
new door had been made, and that the spider had mounted up to fetch
moss from the undisturbed bank above, planting it in the earth which
formed the crown of the door.[80] Here the moss actually called the
eye to the trap, which lay in the little plain of brown earth made by
my digging.

[Footnote 80: Mrs. Boyle first called my attention to this curious
fact, of which I have since seen many examples. I have purposely
removed several cork doors from mossy banks in order to observe this
point.]

I have seen the same thing happen when the door of _N. Eleanora_
has been removed and replaced, moss being again used in the work
of reconstruction. Trap-door spiders in warm weather very quickly
replace their trap-doors; and if you pass by a wall where several
nests have been robbed of their doors only a week before, they will
usually be found quite perfect again.

It has been stated[81] that, if the door of a cork nest be fastened
down with a pin, a second door will be found next day by the side of
the former one. No doubt spiders not unfrequently find their doors
blocked up by a fall of earth, and are thus obliged either to make a
new opening or to prolong the old tube.

[Footnote 81: M. Dorthès on the Structure and Œconomy of some Curious
Species of Aranea, in Trans. Linn. Soc. (London), II. 88-90.]

I once fastened open the surface doors of three of the double-door
nests by passing a thread through the silk of the door and tying it
back to some twigs above. The doors were thus turned backwards, and
the aperture of the tubes, which lay in a vertical terrace wall,
exposed to view.

Next day, after a night of very heavy rain, I found the doors as I
had left them, but in one nest the lip of the tube had been dragged
inwards so as partially to close the tube; in the second nothing
appeared to have been done, but in the third nest a new covering had
been very cleverly extemporized out of three fallen olive-leaves,
which were loosely spun together and attached by one or two threads
to the margin of the tube. This formed an admirable concealment,
but did not move freely as a door, the web being too imperfect. Two
days later, however, it was completed and had become a perfect door,
moving on a hinge just within and below that of the former door,
which still remained as I had fastened it. The other nests remained
in the same condition as before, only that a little moss had been
dragged into the mouth of the tube of the nest, which had been
partially closed with its own lip.

The extreme reluctance which these spiders show to abandon their
dwellings is curiously exemplified by what follows.

Certain nests which were furnished with two doors of the cork type
were observed by Mr. S. S. Saunders[82] in the Ionian Islands.
The door at the surface of these nests was normal in position and
structure, but the lower one was placed at the very bottom of the
nest and inverted, so that, though apparently intended to open
downwards, it was permanently closed by the surrounding earth. The
presence of a carefully constructed door in a situation which forbade
the possibility of its ever being opened seemed, indeed, something
difficult to account for. However, it occurred to Mr. Saunders that,
as these nests were found in the cultivated ground round the roots
of olive-trees, they may occasionally have got turned topsy-turvy
when the soil was broken up. The spider then, finding her door buried
below in the ground and the bottom of the tube at the surface, would
have either to seek new quarters or to adapt the nest to its altered
position, and make an opening and door at the exposed end. In order
to try whether one of these spiders would do this Mr. Saunders placed
a nest, with its occupant inside, upside down in a flower-pot.
After the lapse of ten days a new door was made, exactly as he had
conjectured it would be, and the nest presented two doors like those
which he had found at first.

[Footnote 82: Description of a species of Mygale from Ionia in Trans.
of Ent. Soc. (London, 1839), III. p. 160.]

There is a specimen of one of these inverted nests, with its two
doors, in the British Museum, and this might easily be supposed, at
first sight, to be an example of a new kind of double-door nest. On
close inspection, however, it will be seen that one of the two doors
is discoloured and partly decayed, this being, no doubt, the one
which had been buried beneath in the earth and so rendered useless.

Questions have often been asked as to the manner in which trap-door
nests are commenced in the first instance, and whether the weaving of
the silk lining is begun at the top or the bottom of the tube.

The structure of the cork door also, which often appears so perfectly
turned as to resemble the work of a potter's lathe, is another
difficulty.

These questions have, as it seems to me, been needlessly complicated
by taking it for granted that the perfect nest of the mature spider
is made all at one time, that the tube, perhaps of a foot in length,
is excavated, lined, and furnished with a door within some short
period of time, such as ten days or a fortnight, perhaps.

On the contrary, I believe that the nests are, as a rule, the result
of many successive enlargements, and that the nest of the infant, the
tube of which is no bigger than a crowquill, is not abandoned, but
becomes that of the full-grown spider. This must require time, but
how long, whether months or years, we have yet to learn.

Very little is known at present as to the longevity of spiders, but
Mr. Blackwall[83] says that some live only one year, while others,
such as _Tegenaria civilis_ and _Segestria senoculata_, have been
known to live four.

[Footnote 83: Spiders of Great Britain and Ireland, p. 8.]

Whether the trap-door spiders are very long lived or not I cannot
positively say, but, from the appearance of the growth of moss and
lichen on the doors of some nests which I have observed, I am
inclined to think that they must have been inhabited for more than a
twelvemonth.

Evidence of the enlargement of the door is not very rare to meet
with, though, as a rule, the new piece is woven on to the old with
such neatness as more or less to obscure this. In fig. B, Plate
X., p. 100, the old and smaller surface-door of a nest of _Nemesia
meridionalis_ is seen partially attached to the larger new door,
which has been constructed below it; while in fig. C of the same
plate, three doors, or rather three enlargements of one door, may
be traced. It is this, I believe, that gives rise to the tiled
appearance which these trap-doors sometimes present, and which has
caused them to be compared to oyster-shells. Something similar may
also be occasionally seen in doors of the cork type, as, for example,
in that figured at A and A 1 in Plate VIII., p. 94, where the old
and smaller door is seen partially raised above the surface of the
new one. This I imagine to be merely an example of rather clumsy
workmanship, as, if I am right, a full-sized cork door usually
incloses within itself several lesser doors, which formerly fitted
the tube and have had to be enlarged.

This is borne out by the fact that such a door will, on examination,
be found to consist of several layers of silk, with more or less
earth between each, these layers decreasing in size from without
inwards, and together forming a sort of saucer in which the small
central mass of earth lies. Thus by moistening a series of the cork
doors of _Nemesia cæmentaria_, I have been able to detach, in one of
medium size, from six to fourteen circular patches of silk, of which
the outermost, or that which forms the lower surface of the door,
is the largest, and the innermost the smallest, the others being
intermediate in size as in position. Perhaps if I had had larger
doors at my disposal for examination I might have found more layers,
as other authors[84] speak of a much greater number of layers in the
cork doors of _Cteniza fodiens_. Be this as it may, I am confirmed in
my opinion that the layers of silk mark the successive enlargements
of the nest by the additional fact that in very small doors the
layers of silk are few or single, and that a proportion is observable
as a rule between the size of the door and the number of layers of
which it is composed.[85]

[Footnote 84: M. de Walckenaer seems to have found more than thirty
alternate layers of silk and earth in one of the doors of _Cteniza
fodiens_, as we may gather from the following:--"Quoique cette
porte n'ait guère que trois lignes d'epaisseur, elle est formée par
la superposition de plus de trente couches de terre séparées les
unes des autres par autant de couches de toile. Toutes ces assises
successives s'emboitent les unes dans les autres comme les poids de
cuivre à l'usage de nos petites balances. Les couches de toile se
terminent au pourtour de la porte." Walckenaer, Histoire des Insectes
Aptères (Suites à Buffon), vol. i. p. 238 (Paris, 1837).

I have not found the regular layers of earth and silk of which M.
de Walckenaer speaks, the silk layers being usually in contact
at their centres and only separated by a little ring of earth
interposed between their edges, this earth being thickest towards the
circumference of the layers of silk.]

[Footnote 85: This may be seen by the comparison of the composition
of doors of different sizes, given in Appendix H.]

Another proof that enlargement takes place, may at times be found in
the nests of _N. Eleanora_, where one, or even two useless doors may
be detected behind the lower door.

Now when there are three lower doors in this way the one which is in
use is the largest, and the door lying nearest to this one the next
in size, while the hindmost is the smallest of all. But though those
abandoned doors are now too small to fit the existing tube, they did
so, no doubt, in their day, for they are exact copies in miniature of
the ordinary horse-shoe shaped lower doors. The lower door actually
in use may sometimes be found to have two separable cases of thick
silk enclosing the central mass of earth, and this also, very
probably, represents enlargement. In the nests of _N. meridionalis_ I
have never found any of these abandoned doors behind the one in use,
nor should I expect to find any, for if they were present they would
permanently obstruct the entrance from the main tube to the branch.

It is clear that it is better economy on the part of the spider to
enlarge its nest rather than build a new one each time. If we compare
the infant spider and its nest (fig. B, Plate IX., p. 98) with the
full-grown creature and its nest (fig. A, Plate IX.), it becomes
evident that the growing spider must either construct many nests of
intermediate size, or frequently enlarge the original domicile. And
we do in fact find nests of all sizes between the two extremes.

I cannot help thinking that these very small nests, built as they are
by minute spiders probably not very long hatched from the egg, must
rank among the most marvellous structures of the kind with which we
are acquainted. That so young and weak a creature should be able to
excavate a tube in the earth many times its own length, and know how
to make a perfect miniature of the nest of its parents, seems to be a
fact which has scarcely a parallel in nature.

When we remember how difficult a thing it is for even a trained
draughtsman to reduce by eye a complicated drawing or model to a
greatly diminished scale, we must own that the performance of this
feat by a baby spider is so surprising as almost to exceed belief.

And yet even the most complicated form of nest--namely, that of the
branched double-door type--is perfectly reproduced in miniature by
these tiny architects, with the upper door, lower door, main tube,
and branch (fig. B, Plate IX., p. 98).

In order to test whether the doors are enlarged or not I measured the
surface doors of seven double-door nests and one minute cork door on
April 30th, making a careful plan of the terrace wall in which they
lay, in order to make sure of finding them again on my return to
Mentone in October.

The following table will show that all were enlarged, the average
rate of increase being 1-7/10 lines in the five and a half months
which had elapsed:--

  _Measured April 30, 1872._  |   _Measured Oct. 18, 1872._
                              |
  No. I. 9 lines across       | No. I. 10-1/2 lines across
     II. 4      "             |    II. 5-1/2       "
    III. 4-1/2  "             |   III. 5-1/2       "
     IV. 4      "             |    IV. 4-1/2       "
      V. 2      "             |     V. 3           "
     VI. 2-1/2  "             |    VI. missing
    VII. 1      "  (the cork) |   VII. 2 lines across
   VIII. 5      "             |  VIII. 7-1/2       "

We can scarcely venture from such limited premises to draw any
precise conclusions, but if we suppose that during the entire course
of the year the nests increase on an average by about four lines in
diameter, and assume that the rate of growth continue the same, the
nest of the infant spider, whose surface door measures scarcely a
line across, would still require four years to attain the dimensions
of some of the largest double-door nests, whose surface doors measure
sixteen lines across.

It seems to be the rule with spiders generally that the offspring
should leave the nest and construct dwellings for themselves when
very young.

Mr. Blackwall,[86] speaking of British spiders, says:--"Complicated
as the processes are by which these symmetrical nets are produced,
nevertheless young spiders, acting under the influence of instinctive
impulse, display, even in their first attempts to fabricate them, as
consummate skill as the most experienced individuals."

[Footnote 86: Loc. cit., p. 11.]

Again, Mr. F. Pollock[87] relates of the young of _Epeira aurelia_,
which he observed in Madeira, that when seven weeks old they made a
web the size of a penny, and that these nets have the same beautiful
symmetry as those of the full-grown spider. Those of the latter are
vertical, circular, made of about 250 feet of thread, having about
35 radial lines and 38 concentric circles, the outermost of which
is some 20 inches in diameter. After the lapse of a day or two the
web loses its adhesive property and a new one is made. In about six
months the female _Epeira_ has completed her ten changes of skin, one
of which takes place in the cocoon, and "at the end of eight months
the spider is 2700 times as heavy as at its birth." This _Epeira_
lives, we are told, for about eighteen months.

[Footnote 87: The History and Habits of _Epeira aurelia_, in Annals
and Mag of Nat. Hist. for June, 1865.]

One can scarcely contemplate the work of these architects and
weavers, and especially of the trap-door makers, without being
carried away into the whirlpool of discussion which has so long raged
round the word _instinct_.

Do the young spiders build their first nest by instinct--that is to
say, independently of all teaching or personal experience--or do they
copy the nests in which they were hatched?

What is wanting, however, is not discussion, of which we have had
enough, but demonstration, and demonstration is hard to come by,
depending as it must upon careful and repeated experiment.

If it were practicable, and I have no reason to know that it is not,
to rear spiders from the egg away from the nest, and then to cause
them to build in places where they should be perfectly at home and
yet cut off from all communication with their kind, we might hope to
learn whether they can construct the characteristic nests of their
species without ever having seen one.

Mr. Wallace[88] shows that there is some reason to doubt whether
birds, which are so frequently said to build by instinct, would,
under parallel circumstances, construct the nest proper to their
kind; and he states that birds brought up from the egg in cages do
not do so, nor do they even sing their parents' song without being
taught.

[Footnote 88: Chapters on Instinct and on the Philosophy of Birds'
Nests, in his Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection.]

Of course we can scarcely compare birds and spiders together, but we
should hesitate, in view of Mr. Wallace's expressed opinion as to the
nest-building habits of the former, to assume that the latter are
independent of teaching and personal experience. It may very possibly
be so, but it has never been proved.

I have endeavoured to gather together all the published records
of the nests of spiders belonging to the sub-order _Territelariæ_,
with a view, if possible, to trace out the geographical range of the
several types of structure. I have, however, met with but a small
amount of success, and even among the limited number of tolerably
complete accounts of nests which I have been able to discover,
several made no mention of the spider to which the nest belongs.

Prof. Ausserer[89] has enumerated 215 species of _Territelariæ_ as
having been found in the world at large, but of this large number
ten only, as far as I have been able to learn, have been described
in connexion with their nests, and eight of these belong to the
Mediterranean region.[90] To these we may now add two more, namely,
_Nemesia meridionalis_, with its branched double-door nest, and _N.
Eleanora_ the builder of the unbranched double-door nest, thus making
twelve in all.

[Footnote 89: In his monograph of _Territelariæ_ quoted above.]

[Footnote 90: I use this term in its widest sense, making it even
include Morocco. A list of the species known to inhabit this region
will be found in Appendix C.]

Three of the twelve, however, _Atypus piceus_, _A. Blackwallii_, and
_Nemesia cellicola_,[91] do not appear to build true trap-doors, but
only a simple silk tube without any covering at the mouth.

[Footnote 91: See Appendix A, p. 141.]

The following tabular view will show to which of the four types of
trap-door nest those of the remaining nine spiders belong, and their
geographical distribution:--

TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS WHICH BUILD

  Nests of the cork type.

    _Idiops syriacus_, Beirût.

    _Cteniza fodiens (Ct. Sauvagei)_, Corsica, Pisa, Mentone.

    _Ct. ædificatoria_, Tangiers.

    _Ct. (Cyrtocarenum) ionicum_, Ionian Islands.

    _Ct. (Cyrtocarenum) Ariana_, Naxos, Tinos.

    _Nemesia cæmentaria_, South of France, Spain, Sardinia, Corsica,
        Sicily, Algiers, and the var. _germanica_ from Wippach, near
        Görz.

[Nests, apparently of the true cork type, have also been found in
Australia, New Granada, India, and the island of Formosa, but their
occupants are unknown.]

  Nests of the single-door wafer type.

    _Cteniza nidulans_, West Indies (and South America?)

  Nests of the double-door branched type.

    _Nemesia meridionalis_, Mentone, Cannes, and Sestri, near Genoa.

  Nests of the double-door unbranched type.

    _Nemesia Eleanora_, Mentone, and Cannes.

As far, therefore, as I know at present, the cork type of nest is the
only one which is widely spread, and which is constructed by spiders
of more than one species. For, while the single-door wafer, and the
branched and unbranched double-door nests are each the work of one
particular spider, we see that nests of the cork type are made by
spiders of six distinct species, belonging to at least three genera.

It is almost certain that a much larger number of spiders of
different kinds, though all probably members of the sub-order
_Territelariæ_, construct nests of the cork type, for descriptions
and specimens of trap-doors of this kind are brought from the most
distant parts of the globe. It is true that these specimens and
descriptions usually only show us the surface-door, but as far as our
present knowledge goes, we are led to suppose that a door of the
cork type is always associated with a simple tube, in which there is
no trace of a second door or valve, so that, judging of the unknown
by the known, we conclude that nests which possess the characteristic
peculiarity of a true cork door are true cork nests in other respects
also. Further research may possibly show that there are exceptions to
this generalization, but I do not at present know of any.

I have seen Australian specimens of large trap-doors, of the cork
type, measuring from one to two inches across. In some of these the
doors were scarcely more than semicircular but very thick, and having
their edges bevelled so as to correspond with the sloping margin of
the tube;[92] in others, found at Paramatta, and described to me by
Lady Parker as being tenanted by a black spider, the doors were said
to be circular and much smaller, scarcely larger than a sixpence, and
of the cork type.

[Footnote 92: Specimens of Australian nests may be seen in the cases
at the British Museum.]

The upper portion of a nest from New Granada has been figured and
described by M. Victor Audouin,[93] which closely resembles that
drawn at Fig. A in Plate VII., p. 88, but the door is about a third
larger.

[Footnote 93: Note sur la demeure d'une araignée maçonne de
l'Amérique du Sud. Annales des Sciences Naturelles (Zoologie), tom.
vii. tab. 3, p. 227-231.]

I have also been assured that nests of the cork type are found in
many parts of India, and we have seen above that they are reported to
be common in the island of Formosa.

Putting all this together, it will be seen that nests of this type
are found all round the globe; in Formosa, India, Syria, the Grecian
Archipelago, Italy, and the adjacent islands, Trieste, South France,
Spain, Morocco, New Granada, and Australia; while the single-door
wafer nest is only known at present in the West India islands;[94]
the branched double-door nest at Mentone, Cannes, and Pegli near
Genoa, and [doubtfully] near Naples and in Ischia; and the unbranched
double-door type at Mentone and Cannes alone. It is quite probable
that these three latter forms of nest will some day be found to
have a much wider range than that assigned to them here, but I can
scarcely think it likely that they will ever be shown to claim the
world-wide distribution of the cork type. Supposing that these nests
are eventually discovered in many widely distant localities, a very
interesting question will arise as to the specific characters of
the spiders which inhabit and construct them. Shall we then find,
for example, that nests of the unbranched double-door type are not
tenanted and fabricated by _Nemesia Eleanora_ alone, as we have
hitherto found to be the case, but by many other distinct species
also, each in its peculiar district?

[Footnote 94: There is a nest exhibited in the Museum collection at
the Jardin des Plantes at Paris, marked "Amérique du Sud," which is
perhaps of this type.]

That is to say, will the type of nest remain the same while the
occupants vary, as in the cork nests?

If, on the other hand, we learn that these three types, the
single-door wafer, the branched and unbranched double-door nests, are
very local, we shall be led to inquire into the probable causes of
this limitation.

But we must study much more closely the habits of these trap-door
spiders, and the difficulties and dangers to which they are exposed,
if we wish to appreciate fully the true meaning and intention of
the structure of their nests, and to find the clue to the difficult
question why one type should be more frequently adopted than another.
Above all, we must discover what are their enemies, and how and when
they are most exposed to them. M. de Walckenaer gives an entertaining
account[95] of the enemies to which spiders generally are exposed,
and of this the following list is an abstract.

[Footnote 95: Histoire des Insectes Aptères (Suites à Buffon), vol.
i. p. 172-7.]

Many kinds of monkeys, squirrels, and several sorts of birds, as
well as lizards, tortoises, frogs, and toads prey upon spiders. A
species of black sheep, found in the steppes of Asiatic Russia,
unearths the tarantulas (Lycosa), and eats them. ("Une espèce de
brebis noire, dans les steppes de la Russie asiatique, déterre les
tarentules et les mange"). In the East India Archipelago there
is an entire genus of birds of the passerine order, which have
been named "Arachnoptères" because the different species of which
it is composed live exclusively on spiders. Besides these, the
centipede (_Scolopendra_), and the following Hymenopterous insects,
_Philanthes_, _Sphex_, _Pompilus_, _Pimpla Ovivora_, and _P.
Arachnitor_ [which last lay their eggs in the eggs of spiders], carry
on perpetual hostilities against them.

I have seen it stated that ants are among the worst enemies of
spiders, driving their galleries through the silk tubes of the latter
and devouring their eggs. Of this I have never seen any trace, and,
on the contrary, have on four occasions found the remains of ants'
bodies at the bottom of the trap-door spiders' nests.

I have but seldom detected any refuse in these nests, and this
accords with what M. Erber tells us[96] of the care with which
_Cteniza Ariana_, which he watched by moonlight in the island of
Tinos, carried away the empty bodies of the beetles, the juices of
which had been sucked out, to a distance of some feet from its hole.
In October, 1872, however, I found a black layer of débris at the
bottom of five nests of _Nemesia Eleanora_, and this was composed
principally of the remains of insects, and among others of some
rather large beetles.

[Footnote 96: A translation of these very interesting observations
will be found below in Appendix B.]

As far as I am aware, M. Erber is the only naturalist who has ever
placed any detailed observations on record as to the nocturnal habits
of a trap-door spider in its native haunts; and we may learn from
him how we should watch these creatures, if we wish to discover the
manner in which they take their prey, and of what their prey consists.

He relates how he witnessed the capture, in the long low snare
which _Cteniza Ariana_ spreads close to the ground, of two strong,
night-flying beetles (_Pimelia_ and _Cephalostenus_), and how these
were at once devoured, and their horny coats thrown away.

More observations of this kind are greatly wanted, as it is most
important that we should know what are the principal sources of food
upon which these spiders depend for their existence.

If we could answer the questions, what do they eat? and what do they
fear? we should have advanced a long way towards resolving the larger
problem as to the causes which limit particular species to certain
districts.

I greatly envy those who are able to travel, and who have it in their
power to investigate the habits of these creatures at several widely
separated points; for there seems every probability that other new
types of nest remain to be detected in warm climates, some of which
may perhaps exceed those we have been here studying in beauty of
workmanship and adaptation; it is at least certain that an abundant
harvest of interesting facts in the life history of trap-door spiders
remains yet to be gathered in.

Indeed it appears to me that we are only on the threshold of
discoveries of this kind, and that the materials brought together in
the preceding pages may be considered as but a small sample of what
may be collected on the outermost edge of this great domain.

I shall be satisfied if I have been able in the present little work,
to hold the door sufficiently ajar to permit those who love nature
and her ways to catch a glimpse of the wonders and beauties of the
untrodden land that lies beyond.




APPENDIX.


A.

_Nemesia (Mygale) meridionalis_, Costa.[97]

[Footnote 97: Costa, Fauna del Regno di Napoli, Aracnidi (1861), p.
14, tab. i. figs. 1-4. [Translation.]]

"M. fusco rufoque-flavicante, maculis obscurioribus, thorace
radiatim, abdomine seriatim dispositis, subtus thorace rufescente,
abdomine flavidulo, mandibulis spinarum serie unica, tarsis omnibus
spinulosis."

"The cephalothorax oval, elongated and truncate in front, while the
head is smooth and bare, with a group of eight eyes, a little keeled
in the middle; of a fulvous-brown colour, with ten rather dusky
spots arranged in rays, and corresponding to the direction of the
eight legs (anche) and the two maxillæ. The mandibles are large,
horizontal at first, then curved downwards, making a quarter of a
circle, furnished with numerous hairs, especially on the inner side,
and at the anterior extremity above there are mobile and rather long
spines; below they are channelled, with six little teeth or spines
on the edge (rilievo) of the inner face, clothed with many bristling
hairs, with which the outside is also covered, but without any teeth;
on the inner face they are flattened, so that they fit perfectly
close. The fang is strong, curved, acute, and black. The maxillæ
are clothed with brown hairs almost as the legs are, and at their
extremity, on the outer side, stand the long palpi, rather hairy
(pelacciuti), terminated by a very short and simple little claw.
The sternal lip is very small and round. The abdomen oval, longer
or shorter according to age, dusky ash in colour, spotted with
brown, and covered with short and depressed (rasicci) hairs. The
brown spots are disposed in slanting lines, placed obliquely to the
median line, which is also brown; below it is somewhat lighter, and
becomes slightly yellow, increasingly so in the female as pregnancy
advances. The pulmonal sacs are always pale yellow, and involved in
the fold (tramezzati dalla ripiegatura). Between these, and within
the fold itself, the female sexual organ opens, consisting of a
transverse opening invisible to the naked eye, but clearly seen on
using a lens and removing the fold under which it is concealed, by
means of the point of a scalpel or of a pin. The posterior extremity
of the anus presents four spinnerets, of which the two upper are much
the longer, and composed of four easily seen joints, the lower very
short. The feet are moderate, and the longest are of the length of
the entire body when this is fully developed (quando è perfettamente
sviluppato); of these the fourth pair are about a third longer
than the first, the third of about the same length as the second,
which is the shortest of all. The tarsi of these are armed with two
small curved claws, and the third and fourth joint with many long,
delicate, straight, and mobile spines, which in the first pair become
fewer as they approach the last joint. The eyes are arranged in three
lines, as they are represented in C, Plate I., Fig. 3, and of these
the two last of the posterior line are white and glistening, the
others brown.

"Our _Mygale_ lives in tubular cavities, or burrows, which she
excavates for herself in loose and friable soil, in walls made of
volcanic earth, in shady places, and for the most part turned to the
north or to the west, seldom to the south--hence cool and rather
damp. The burrows do not exceed the length of a palm, eight lines at
their widest part. For about the length of an inch the tube is funnel
shaped, thence it continues of a nearly uniform magnitude. Its first
direction is almost horizontal, then it rises continually, turning
to the right or left, and sometimes makes zigzags. As the tubes are
excavated in friable soil, she takes care to tapestry them inside
with the same glutinous material of which the other races make their
web, by means of which the burrows are made smooth on the inside, and
to strengthen them in such a manner that even when the outer earthy
part has become cracked, or been torn away by the action of the rain,
they remain firm and fit to conceal their inhabitant. I have often
found the tubes of web thus left exposed, as they are represented
in Plate I., Fig. 4, situated in the cement of a wall, and among
_Lycopodium denticulatum_, _Adiantum Capillus-Veneris_, _Marchantia
polymorpha_, and other small plants. And it seems that the animal,
perceiving the nature of the soil, takes care to reinforce the
silken case, so much the more as she finds the earth less firm, and
_vice versâ_. So that in burrows excavated in solid ground, with
the exception of a little space close to the aperture, the nest is
merely smoothed and daubed; while sometimes the spider constructs a
tube so strong that it supports itself even when deprived of all the
earth, the animal having had the foresight to attach it along the
course of the clefts of the rock, or to the cement of the pieces of
tufa in the wall, as represented in Plate I. They have often also a
double aperture, and the upper portions of the burrows converging,
meet and anastomose at about two inches distance. The aperture is
closed by a little door or valve (_a_), which, having its hinge in
the upper part and a little on one side, falls by its own weight, and
fits itself exactly to the opening. The outer surface of the wicket
is covered with earth, cemented by the glue of the spider, so that
it is rendered imperceptible to common eyes, and the industrious
little creature takes care to leave around the aperture a kind of
rim, to which the door fitting closely, leaves no passage for any
animal, nor does it show its edges. At the bottom of its tube the
creature keeps her numerous offspring, and always stands herself as
sentinel at the door, holding the wicket raised by means of the four
anterior feet, and the palpi, curved extremities of which she inserts
between the rim of the tube and of the door, as represented in _a'
f_. Sometimes, however, they do not appear, but she leaves only the
chink for observation, as one sees in _a_ of the same figure. Fig.
2, at _c_, represents the aperture of an abandoned burrow, and at
_d_ the raised door of another burrow, with its almost funnel-shaped
aperture. That which Sauvage, Olivier, and Latreille relate of her
is not true--namely, that she remains at the bottom of the burrow,
and runs to the door only when she sees it threatened, in order to
keep the door firmly closed. On the contrary, always standing at the
door as sentinel, she leaves it as soon as she thinks it in danger,
so that it can be raised without the least effort: but if you hold
it a little raised without making any sign of movement, she turns
on her back, and comes out to draw it down with her feet, making
all the efforts she can to conquer the obstacle. But if you take
it away entirely, she turns down the edges to close the aperture
as best she can, and that she does hurriedly, without waiting for
night. The light seems to offend her so much that, if exposed to the
full day, she remains so stupefied as to appear dead, nor does she
move even if shaken; on the contrary, she constantly stops still and
holds herself with her feet pressed against her body. At last, if
very much disturbed, she runs quickly for some distance, till she
finds a place in which to hide her head, and from thence she does
not stir. I have observed that the burrows are always short when
the aperture is small, and increase in length as they augment in
diameter, which makes me conclude that it is not true that they begin
their excavations from the base of the mother's tube, where I have
never found any communication with others. This spider is found in
the neighbourhood of Naples (ne' contorni della Capitale), on the
Camaldoli, in the island of Ischia, where it lives near the sources
of mineral waters, in Gaeta at the foot of the olive trees, among the
stones in the ground, &c. &c.

"Observation. The difference which distinguishes our _Mygale_ from
the _Sauvagesii_ consists, first, in the toothing of the mandibles,
which is observable on one side only of the channel, and not on both;
secondly, in the tarsi all equally armed with spines, and not only
the four anterior ones; thirdly, in the colour of the thorax and
the abdomen, which is not uniform as is usual in the _Sauvagesii_.
Nevertheless, such differences might be in part climatic, which would
cause our _Mygale_ to be considered as a mere variety of the same
species, and the others might be the result of the different method
of examining the parts, and of the goodness of the instruments."

At p. 19, in the _Fauna del Regno di Napoli_, M. Costa gives the
following account of the nest of _Nemesia cellicola_, which he
discovered above San Martino in September, 1833:--

"Vive entro la polvere arida, nelle cavità oscure delle muraglie, e
propriamente nelle così dette _Saettiere_, ove, col glutine suo, si
costruisce un tubo delicato e mobile, che ha cura di affidare nel suo
origine a qualche corpo stabile nel fondo del muro, e che in terra
nella polvere, aprendosi l'altro estremo sul piano inclinato dalla
polvere stessa costituto."

This, with the exception of the words "e che in terra nella polvere,"
which are unintelligible to me as they stand, and appear to want a
verb, may be translated as follows:--

"She lives in the dry dust, in the obscure crevices of walls, and
especially in those which are called _Saettiere_ (loop-holed walls?),
where she constructs a delicate and flexible tube with her viscid
secretion, and which she takes care to fasten at its commencement to
some solid body at the bottom of the wall, ... the other extremity
opening on the inclined plane formed by the dust itself."

We may remark that there is here no mention of any door or
concealment at the mouth of the tube, and in this and some other
respects the nest of _Nemesia cellicola_ would appear to resemble the
nest of _Atypus piceus_ from the neighbourhood of Paris. See above in
the text, p. 78.


B.

_On the Habits of Cteniza Ariana._

The following is a free translation of an account read by M. Erber
before the Botanico Zoological Association of Vienna,[98] of the
very curious observations which he made on _Cteniza Ariana_ when
travelling in the Grecian Archipelago.

[Footnote 98: Verhand. der k. k. zoologisch-botanischer Verein in
Wien, vol. xviii. (1868), p. 905.]

"On my return voyage [from Rhodes], I stayed for a fortnight in
the island of Tinos, and, among other things, I captured several
specimens of the so-called trap-door spider (Deckelspinne) _Cteniza
Ariana_, Walck., and with much trouble procured an entire tube and
trap-door of this creature.... I am thus enabled to exhibit to this
honourable assembly the complete nest of this creature, and the
spider herself, with her eggs, preserved in alcohol, and can moreover
add some few words as to her habits.

"It needs some practice, as the specimen before you shows, to enable
one to discover the nest, as the door is always closed by day. I dug
out several of these tubes, but failed to find either the remains of
food or excrement. So there was nothing for it but to devote a couple
of nights to watch these creatures. With this view I selected a place
where many spiders had excavated their tunnels, and availed myself of
a moonlight night for my observations.

"Shortly after nine o'clock the doors opened and the spiders came
out, fastened back the trap-doors by means of threads to neighbouring
blades of grass or little stones, then spun a snare about six inches
long by half an inch high, and afterwards returned quietly to their
holes.

"I had so chosen my position that I could see three of these spiders
at the same time. I now captured a specimen and put it into spirits,
and in a short time saw entangled in the net of one of the remaining
spiders a _Pimelia_, and of the other a _Cephalostenus_, both rather
hard-lived, night-flying beetles, which were seized by the spiders,
and the latter, after sucking out the juices, carried the empty
bodies to a distance of several feet from their holes. All these
events happened in about three hours, after which time I allowed the
two spiders to remain undisturbed, and returned to the house.

"Early next morning I revisited the spot, and then perceived that
these two spiders had entirely removed the net which they made the
preceding night, but the entrance to the nest of the spider which
I had captured still remained open, and I could clearly trace the
shape of its snare, on which the heavy morning's dew lay. The upper
threads were isolated, but the snare became thicker as it approached
the ground. I found that these snares had, strange to relate, been
gathered up by the two other spiders, fastened on to the door, and
smoothly spun over, and, on making a vertical section of the doors,
which were nearly a quarter of an inch thick, I discovered that they
were composed of several layers.

"In the nests of several females I found eggs at the bottom of the
tube, not placed in cocoons, but attached by separate threads. The
young spiders when hatched are turned out from the asylum of their
mother's nest; and I found these creatures when scarcely two lines
long already established in nests three inches deep, and furnished
with perfect trap-doors, of which facts the specimens I now lay
before you are the evidence."


C.

Species of Territelariæ, enumerated by Professor Ausserer,[99]
belonging to Europe and the Mediterranean region, with synonyms, and
two species which I have added in brackets:--

[Footnote 99: Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Arachniden-Familie der
Territelariæ, in k. k. zool.-bot. Gesellschaft in Wien (1871), vol.
xxi. pp. 117-224.]

_Atypus piceus_, Sulzer. (_A. Sulzeri_, Latr.) Holland, France,
Switzerland, Germany, Northern Italy.

_A. Blackwallii_, Auss. England.

_A. Anachoreta_, L. Koch. Fiume.

_Idiops Syriacus_, Cambr. Beirût.

_Æpycephalus brevidens_, Doleschall. Sicily.

_Cteniza Sauvagei_, Rossi. (_Ct. fodiens_), Corsica, Pisa, Mentone,
Ionian Islands.

_Ct. orientalis_, Auss. Brussa.

_Ct. ædificatoria_, Westw. (_Actinopus ædificatorius_, Westw.)
Tangiers.

_Ct. algeriana_, Luc. Algiers.

_Cyrtocarenum Arianum_, Walck. (_Mygale (Cteniza) Ariana_, Walck.).
Naxos, Tinos.

_C. tigrinum_, L. Koch. Syra.

_C. grajum_, C. Koch. Nauplia in the Morea.

_C. ionicum_, Saunders. Ionia.

_C. lapidarium_, Luc. Crete.

_Cyrtauchenius Walckenaerii_, Luc. Algiers.

_C. Doleschallii_, Auss. Sicily.

_C. similis_, L. Koch. Saragossa.

_C. obscurus_, Auss. Sicily.

_Nemesia cæmentaria_, Latr. S. France, Spain, Sardinia, Corsica,
Sicily, Algiers.

_N. cæmentaria_, var. _germanica_, Auss. Wippach, near Görz in
Trieste.

[_N. meridionalis_, Costa. Naples, Ischia, Sestri near Genoa,
Mentone, and Cannes.]

[_N. Eleanora_. Mentone and Cannes.]

_N. cellicola_, Sav. et Aud. Rome, Sicily, and Egypt.

_N. maculatipes_, Doleschall. Sardinia.

_N. badia._, Auss. Corsica.

_N. manderstjernæ_, L. Koch. Nice.

_N. hispanica_, L. Koch. Madrid.

_N. macrocephala_, Auss. Palermo.

_Brachythele icterina_, C. Koch. Greece.

_B. incerta_, Auss. Brussa.

_Macrothele calpetana_, Walck. Southern Spain.

_M. luctuosa_, Luc. Southern Spain.

_Leptopelma transalpina_, Doleschall. Friuli.

_Ischnocolos triangulifer_, Doleschall. Sicily.

_I. holosericeus_, L. Koch. Spain.

_I. gracilis_, Auss. Cyprus.

_I. syriacus_, Auss. Syria.

_Chætopelma ægyptiaca_, Dol. Egypt.


D.

_Hints on Collecting Spiders._

It is very important to collect adult specimens of males and females,
but the former, from their roaming habits, are often extremely
difficult to find.

At night they may sometimes be taken by lamp-light near the nests
of the females, and certain kinds are said to live with the female
during the months of September and October. The females may usually
be found in their nests during the daytime (always in Europe?).

Large spiders should be killed, or at least stupefied with
chloroform, before being put into spirit of wine. It is convenient to
place the specimens in glass test-tubes closed with corks, and filled
with pure spirit of wine, as they may then be examined through the
glass.

When specimens of more than one species are placed in the same
tube or bottle, it is well to distinguish each by a number written
in pencil on a small strip of card fastened round the body with a
slip-noose of thread.

The patterns on the abdomen and cephalothorax of the spiders are seen
very distinctly when the spiders are immersed in spirits of wine,
and these frequently afford characters which aid in determining the
species.

M. Thorell, in the introduction to his work _On European
Spiders_,[100] gives a detailed account of a method by which
specimens may be prepared for mounting in cabinets, by drying them
within a glass tube held over a flame, but it would appear that, for
purposes of study, specimens preserved in spirit of wine are far
preferable.

[Footnote 100: Thorell (T.), On European Spiders, in Nova Acta Regiæ
Societ. Scientiar. Upsaliensis, ser. 3, vol. viii. fasc. I. et II.
(Upsala, 1871).]

It is very desirable to obtain characteristic portions of, or
if possible entire nests, but where the tubes are long, this is
extremely difficult to do satisfactorily.

Some nests, preserved in the British Museum, have been coated with
thin glue, and this appears to be of some use in binding the parts
together. I find that by stuffing the tube full of cotton-wool,
before attempting to remove the earth, the nest may sometimes be
obtained in tolerably good condition.


E.

_The Nest of the Tarantula (Lycosa Tarentula)._

As it is of some interest to compare the burrow of the Tarantula
with the nest of its near allies the trap-door spiders, I give the
following _résumé_ of M. Dufour's observations:[101]--

[Footnote 101: Quoted by M. Lucas, in his Histoire Nat. des Animaux
Crustacés et Arachnides, p. 357.]

"_Lycosa Tarentula_ forms a cylindrical burrow in the earth, often
more than a foot long, and about one inch in diameter. At about four
or five inches below the surface the perpendicular tube is bent
horizontally, and it is at this angle that the Tarantula watches for
the approach of enemies or prey.

"The external orifice of the burrow of the Tarantula is ordinarily
surmounted by a separately constructed tube, and which authors have
not hitherto mentioned; this tube, a true piece of architecture,
rises to about an inch above the surface of the ground, and is
sometimes as much as two inches in diameter, being thus larger than
the burrow itself. This tube is principally composed of fragments
of wood fastened together with clayey earth, and so artistically
disposed one above the other that they form a scaffolding having
the shape of an upright column, of which the interior is a hollow
cylinder."

M. Dufour observes, however, that the exterior tube was not found in
all the nests. In every case the tube was lined with silk throughout
its whole length.


F.

The following description is that given by Prof. Ausserer in his
monograph of _Territelariæ_,[102] of a male trap-door spider
which was found at Nice, and named by Herr L. Koch _Nemesia
Manderstjernæ_. It is just possible, I think, that this male may in
reality belong to _N. meridionalis_ [Costa-Cambr.], of which the
female alone is at present known.[103] If this is the case, then the
name _Manderstjernæ_ will have to be suppressed in favour of that of
_meridionalis_. If not, we have yet to discover the female spider and
nest of another species of _Nemesia_!

[Footnote 102: Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Arachniden-Familie der
Territelariæ, in Verhand. der k. k. zool.-bot. Gesellschaft in Wien
(1871), vol. xxi. p. 170.]

[Footnote 103: Mr. Pickard-Cambridge regards this suggestion (that
_N. Manderstjernæ_ may be the male of _N. meridionalis_) not
improbable.]


5. _Nemesia Manderstjernæ_, L. Koch.

♂ Die genaue Beschreibung dieser hübschen Art ihrem Autor, Herrn
Dr. L. Koch überlassend, führen wir hier nur jene wesentlichen
Unterscheidungsmerkmale an, welche diese Species von den verwandten
auszeichnen.--Cephalothorax schön gerundet mit schmalem, mässig hohem
Kopfe.--Augenhügel hoch, nach vorn und hinten steil abfallend.--Die
vordere und hintere Augenreihe bilden 2 nahezu parallele Curven,
mit der Concavität nach vorn. Vordere Mittelaugen stehen so hoch,
dass eine Gerade von ihrer Basis zu den Seitenaugen gezogen etwas
über denselben zu stehen käme, zugleich sind sie von einander
um ihren Radius und kaum weiter von den vorderen Seitenaugen
entfernt. Augen der vorderen Reihe fast doppelt so gross als
die der hinteren.--Zähne des Rechens lang und spitz.--Palpen
mässig lang, letztes und vorletztes Glied ähnlich bewaffnet wie
bei _N. cellicola_.[104]--Bulbus birnförmig, mit etwas kurzer,
dünner Spitze.--Alle Tarsen der Beine, ebenso Metatarsus I und
II mit dünner Scopula, zugleich sind die Tarsen wehrlos.--Tibia
I keilförmig verdickt, unten an der Spitze ein starker nach
oben und innen gebogener, spitzer Zahn, vor demselben ein oben
gerade abgestutzter Höcker.--Schenkel oben und innen mit dunkelm
Längsstreifen.--Cephalothorax 6·5^{mm}.

[Footnote 104: Description of palpi of _N. cellicola_, p. 168:
"Palpen kurz, stark. Femuralglied oben bestachelt; vorletztes Glied
oben an der Spitze mit 4 starken, etwas kurzen Stacheln, auch das
Endglied nach oben mit sehr kleinen Stacheln bewaffnet. Bulbus kurz
birnförmig, in eine feine, mässiglange, fadendunne (vorn nicht
gespaltene) Spitze auslaufend."]

Nizza.

Of this description the following is, I hope, a tolerably correct
translation:--


_Nemesia Manderstjernæ_, L. Koch.

♂ Passing over the precise description of this pretty species by its
author, Herr Dr. L. Koch, let us note here some of the essential
characters which distinguish this species from its relations.
_Cephalothorax_ fairly (schön) rounded, with small, moderately
prominent head. Eye eminence (Augenhügel) prominent, steeply inclined
in front and behind. The front and rear row of eyes form two nearly
parallel curves with the concavity in front. The foremost central
eyes stand so high that a line (eine Gerade) drawn from their base to
the lateral eyes would pass just above them, although they are not
separated from the lateral eyes by a distance greater than that of
their own radius. Eyes of front row almost twice as large as those of
hind row. Teeth of rake (Rechens) long and sharp. _Palpi_ moderately
long, the last and penultimate joint armed as in _N. cellicola_.[105]
Bulb pear-shaped, with a rather shorter, more slender point. All the
tarsi of the legs, and even the metatarsi I and II, with a slender
scopula, although the tarsi are unarmed. Tibia I enlarged into a
wedge-shape, (having) beneath the apex a stout pointed tooth bent
upwards and inwards, in front of which (is) a truncated prominence
(ein oben gerade abgestutzter Höcker). Femur (Schenkel) (having)
dusky longitudinal stripes above within.--Cephalothorax 6·5^{mm}.

[Footnote 105: Description of palpi of _N. cellicola_:--_Palpi_,
short, strong. Femoral joint furnished with spines above; penultimate
joint armed with four stout rather short spines above the apex, the
terminal joint also having some very small spines. Bulb shortly
pear-shaped, running out into a fine, moderately long point, which is
slender as a thread, and not split in front.]

Nice.


G.

_On Nemesia meridionalis and N. Eleanora, Captive in Company with
their Young._

I have tried the experiment of keeping specimens of _Nemesia
meridionalis_ and _N. Eleanora_ captive in flower-pots, partly
filled with earth and covered with gauze, but I have never been
able to detect the least inclination on the part of either of these
spiders to excavate a burrow in the earth.

Thinking that I might have better success if I were to place the
mother spiders, together with their young, in captivity, I captured a
female _N. meridionalis_ and _N. Eleanora_, each with its brood, and
placed them on moist earth in flower-pots under gauze. The result,
however, was that the young spiders concealed themselves in the
crevices of the soil, while the mother spiders remained exposed.

The adult _N. meridionalis_ lived thus for twenty days (from the 7th
to the 27th of November), capturing and killing flies with which I
supplied her, but she then suddenly died.

After seventeen days' captivity the other species (_N. Eleanora_)
began to cover a small surface of the gauze with a semi-transparent
substance (which resembled varnish rather than silk), secreted from
its spinners, and four days later it began to weave a cell; this
cell took twelve days to complete, and finally assumed the shape of
a rudely-formed figure of 8, with a circular aperture at either end,
each of which was kept open during the construction of the cell, and
then closed. The gauze itself, covered with silk, formed the ceiling
of the cell, while the floor was made of silk attached to the earth,
and the sides of strong and rather opaque silk.

This cell bore no resemblance to any portion of any trap-door
nest that I have ever seen, and it is difficult to conceive how
the idea of such a structure presented itself to the spider. Its
outline indeed had some likeness to the general outline of the
spider herself, one loop of the figure 8 being rather smaller than
the other. The distance between the floor and the ceiling of this
impromptu cell was a little over half an inch, its width varying from
one inch in the broadest to eight lines in the narrowest part, while
its length was an inch and a quarter.

It would appear that the object which the spider had in view
was to construct a warm and secure retreat for the winter, and
accordingly after having completed this chamber, she no longer made
excursions to catch the flies with which I supplied her, but remained
self-immured in her cell.[106]

[Footnote 106: My observations on the captive spider were still in
progress at the time of going to print, so that the above notes must
be considered as incomplete.]

It would be interesting to discover whether any of the spiders of
this group (but which do not construct trap-door nests) pass the
winter in similar structures.


H.

_On the Structure of Cork Doors._

In order to test my theory to the effect that the trap-door nests are
enlarged from time to time, and that the numbers of layers of silk in
an undisturbed cork door should represent the number of enlargements
which the nest has undergone, I examined the doors of twenty-eight
nests of the cork type (all I believe of _N. cæmentaria_), in order
to prove whether as a rule the larger cork doors do contain more
layers of silk than the small ones, as they should on this hypothesis.

This is, I think, fairly established by the following table:--


_Comparative Table._

  One cork door measuring 1     line across contained 1 layer of silk.
  Four  "  doors  "       1-1/2 lines   "             3 layers  "
  One   "  door   "       1-1/2         "             2         "
  One   "  door   "       1-3/4         "             4         "
  One   "  door   "       2             "             5         "
  Two   "  doors  "       2-1/2         "             6         "
  One   "  door   "       2-1/2         "             5         "
  One   "  door   "       3             "             8         "
  Two   "  doors  "       3-1/2         "             5         "
  One   "  door   "       3-1/2         "             7         "
  One   "  door   "       4             "             7         "
  Two   "  doors  "       4-1/2         "             8         "
  One   "  door   "       4-1/2         "             7         "
  Two   "  doors  "       5             "             9         "
  One   "  door   "       5             "             5         "
  One   "  door   "       5             "             6         "
  One   "  door   "       5             "            13         "
  One   "  door   "       5-1/2         "             9         "
  One   "  door   "       5-1/2         "            10         "
  One   "  door   "       5-1/2         "            14         "
  One   "  door   "       6             "            12         "

The apparent exceptions to this rule, in which the larger doors have
fewer layers than some of the smaller ones, may probably be accounted
for in the following manner.

During the heavy rains and in times of drought flakes of earth often
become detached from the sloping banks, and carry away the doors of
such nests as are found in them.

This happens frequently, and the spiders hasten to repair the damage
and spin new doors.

But I have found, on examining eight of these new doors, that, even
in large nests,[107] they do not then contain more than three layers
of silk; so that each time a nest of any size loses its door, the
number of layers is greatly reduced.

[Footnote 107: Of the eight doors in question the smallest measured
3-1/2 lines across, and the largest 7 lines.]

In the case of six of these nests I had myself acted the part of the
landslip and removed the existing door. These original and apparently
undisturbed doors measured 3-1/2, 4, 5, 5, 5, and 5 lines across, and
contained respectively 5, 7, 8, 13, 9 and 5 layers of silk; while
of the equally large doors which replaced them five contained three
layers of silk only, and the remaining nest but a single layer.




INDEX.


PART I.--HARVESTING ANTS.

  Ælian on harvesting ants, 7-9.

  Aldrovandus, radicle of seed gnawed by ants, 9.

  Algiers, harvesters observed in, 52.

  Aphides and cocci not sought by harvesting ants, 48.

  Atta _barbara_, 15, &c.;
    _barbara_ var., 16, 31, 63;
    _barbata_, 12;
    _cephalotes_, 13;
    _diffusa_, 12 (note), 65;
    _megacephala_, 16, working at night, 49;
    _providens_, 12 (note), 65;
    _rufa_, 12 (note), 64;
    _structor_, 16, 29, 63, working at night, 49.


  Battles of ants between different colonies of the same species, 37, 40;
    with caterpillar, 41.


  Capri, harvesting ants at, 68.

  Captive ants, 42-49.

  Crematogaster _scutellaris_, 62;
    _sordidulus_, 63.


  Dispersal of seeds by means of ants, 4, 21, 53, 55.

  Distribution of harvesting ants, 52, 57, 59.


  Enemies of the ants, 56.


  Formica _cruentata_, 37, 61;
    _cursor_, 62;
    _emarginata_, 61, working at night, 49;
    _erratica_, 37, 62;
    _fusca_, 51, 61;
    _marginata_, 62;
    _nigra_, 5 (note);
    _nigerrima_, 52;
    _viatica_, 52.


  Galls found in ants' nests, 36.

  Germination of seeds arrested by ants, 20, 25, 26, 40;
    this fact mentioned by Aldrovandus, 9.

  Granaries, structure of, 22, 23, 31, 32, 49, 54;
    position of, 31;
    contents of, 27;
    time required to construct, 45.


  Insects inhabiting ants' nests, 35, 36, 56.


  Jerdon (Dr.) on harvesting ants in India, 12, 64, 65.


  Kirby and Spence, assertion that ants do not harvest in Europe, 10.


  Mistakes made by ants, 19, 37.

  Mouth organs of ants, 48.

  Myrmica _cæspitum_, 37, 51, 63.


  Occasional harvesters, 51.

  Œcodoma _cephalotes_, 13;
    _diffusa_, 12 (note), 65;
    _providens_, 12 (note), 65.


  Pheidole _megacephala_, 16, 50, 63, working at night, 49;
    _pallidula_, 51, 63.

  Pseudomyrma _rufo-nigra_, 67.


  Radicle of germinating seeds gnawed off by ants, 20, 25, 26;
    this fact mentioned by Aldrovandus, 9.

  Rock nest, sandstone mined by ants, 32-35.

  Rubbish heaps, materials which compose, 21, 22, 55.


  Sandstone mined by ants, the rock nests, 31-35.

  Seeds, dispersal of, by means of ants, 4, 21, 53, 55;
    tendency to germinate arrested, 24, 50;
    eaten by ants, 46-48, 54.

  Seed stores of ants used as food by natives of India, 67.

  Spherical chamber found in ant's nest, 35.

  Sykes (Lieut.-Col.) and Jerdon (Dr.) on harvesting ants in India, 12,
    64, 65.


  Winged males and females of Aph. _Structor_ and _Barbara_, 41.


PART II.--TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS.

  Atypus _Blackwallii_, 78.

  Atypus _piceus_, 77;
    nest of, 78.

  Ausserer (A.), description of Nemesia _manderstjernæ_, 145.

  Australia, trap-door spiders in, 114, 130.


  Blackwall, on nests of Atypus _piceus_, 78 (note).

  Blackwall, on the tarsi of certain spiders being furnished with a
    viscous secretion, 87.

  British representative of the sub-order Territelariæ, 77.

  Browne (Patrick), on the trap-door spider of Jamaica, 73.


  Cambridge (Rev. O. Pickard), description of Cteniza _fodiens_, 89;
    of Nemesia _cæmentaria_, 92;
    of N. _meridionalis_, 101;
    of N. _Eleanora_, 108.

  Captive trap-door spiders, 118, 122, 143.

  Claws, compared in different trap-door spiders, 86;
    retractile, 87 (note).

  Construction of trap-door nests, 118, 122, 123, 149.

  Cork nests, 80, 88, 94, 97, 116, 124, 131, 132, 141.

  Costa (O. G.), on Mygale (Nemesia) _meridionalis_, 105, 137.

  Cteniza _ariana_, 115, 135, 141;
    _ædificatorius_, 85;
    _fodiens_, 89;
    _ionica_, 91;
    _nidulans_, 81.


  Double-door branched nest, 80, 98, 103-106, 131.

  Double-door unbranched nest, 80, 98, 106, 111, 131.

  Dufour (Léon), on the nest of Lycosa _tarentula_, 146.


  Enemies of spiders, 101, 134.

  Epeira _fasciata_, cocoon of, 76.

  Erber, on the nocturnal habits of Cteniza _ariana_, 115, 135, 141.


  Geographical range of species of trap-door spiders, 131, 132, 133, 143.

  Gosse (P. H.), on the single-door wafer nest in Jamaica, 80-83.


  Instinct (?) of nest building in very young spiders, 123, 126, 128.


  Lucas (H.), on spiders having retractile claws, 87.

  Lycosa _tarentula_, M. Dufour on the nest of, 146.


  Male of Nemesia _Eleanora_, 109, 115.

  Mygalidæ, name changed to Territelariæ, 75.


  Nemesia _cæmentaria_, 73, 92, 97, resisting when the door is touched,
    94-96;
    _cellicola_, 141, 147, 148;
    _Eleanora_, 98, 106, 108, 112;
    _Manderstjernæ_, 147;
    _meridionalis_, 98, 101, 137.

  Nest of Lycosa _tarentula_, 146.

  Nocturnal habits of trap-door spiders, 115, 116.


  Olivier, on cork nests at Hyères, 115.


  Rossi (P.), on Cteniza _fodiens_, 73.

  Resistance of spiders when doors are touched, 94-96, 100, 112.


  Saunders (S. S.), on Cteniza (_Mygale_) _ionica_, 91, 122.

  Sauvages (Abbé), on Nemesia _cæmentaria_, 73.

  Selection of materials for trap-doors, 119, 120.

  Sells (W.), on the nest of Cteniza _nidulans_, 83.

  Single-door wafer nests, 80, 131.


  Tarsi of spiders furnished with a viscous secretion, enabling them to
    traverse perpendicular polished surfaces, 87.

  Territelariæ a sub-order of Araneæ, formerly called Mygalidæ, 75.

  Territelariæ, species of, inhabiting the Mediterranean region, 130, 131,
    133, 143.

  Theridion, cocoon of, 77.

  Trap-door nests enlarged not abandoned, 123, 127, 150.


  Walckenaer (C. A. de) on habits of trap-door spiders, 114, 117;
    on structure of cork doors, 125 (note).

  Wallace (A. R.) on the philosophy of birds' nests, 129.

  West Indian nests of the single door wafer type, 80.

  Westwood (Prof.) on the nest of Cteniza _ædificatorius_, 85.


  Young spiders found in nests of Nemesia _meridionalis_ and N.
    _Eleanora_, 112.


       *       *       *       *       *






Supplement to Harvesting Ants and Trap-door Spiders.


J. Traherne Moggridge


Transcriber's Note: Text emphasis denoted as _Italic_ and =Bold=.
Whole numbers and fractional parts as 123-4/5.


                             SUPPLEMENT

                                 TO

                           HARVESTING ANTS

                                 AND

                         TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS.




                             SUPPLEMENT
                                 TO
                           HARVESTING ANTS
                                 AND
                         TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS.


                                 BY
                J. TRAHERNE MOGGRIDGE, F.L.S., F.Z.S.


            _WITH SPECIFIC DESCRIPTIONS OF THE SPIDERS,_

                               BY THE

                     REV. O. PICKARD-CAMBRIDGE.


                           [Illustration]


                               LONDON:
         L. REEVE & CO., 5, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
                                1874.


  LONDON:
  SAVILL, EDWARDS AND CO., PRINTERS, CHANDOS STREET,
  COVENT GARDEN.




CONTENTS.


                                        PAGE
  SUPPLEMENT TO HARVESTING ANTS         157

  SUPPLEMENT TO TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS       180

  SPECIFIC DESCRIPTIONS OF SPIDERS      254




EXPLANATION OF PLATES.

  Plate XIII., p. 183, fig. A.--Silk lining of tube of _Atypus
        piceus_ (Sulz.), taken at Troyes in Champagne, and
        communicated to me by M. E. Simon; B, drawing of portion
        of nest of _Cyrtauchenius elongatus_ (Sim.) made after the
        description of the discoverer, and subject to his (M. E.
        Simon's) corrections. This is the only illustration in the
        present work not taken from an actual specimen. These figures
        are of the natural size.

  Plate XIV., p. 193.--Diagrams of the known types of trap-door nest.
        Fig. A, nest of _Atypus piceus_ (Sulz.); B, nest of cork
        type; B 1, the layers of silk with earth rims of which a cork
        door is composed; C, single-door unbranched wafer type; D,
        single-door branched wafer type; E double-door unbranched
        wafer type; E 1, lower door of the same, of the natural size;
        F, Hyères double-door branched wafer type; F 1, lower door
        of the same, of the natural size; G, and G 1, double-door
        branched cavity wafer type. At G 1 the perfect type is seen,
        while at G, the descending cavity, the outlines of which are
        indicated by dotted lines, has been filled up; G 2, lower
        door of the same of the natural size. (Figs. A, B, C, D,
        E, F, G and G 1, diagrammatic representations of nest on a
        reduced scale, Figs. B 1, E 1, F 1 and G 2, of the natural
        size).

  Plate XV., p. 198, fig. A.--Nest of _Cteniza Californica_ (Camb.)
        nearly entire, enclosed in the clayey earth of the bank from
        which the specimen was taken, the door being artificially
        represented as being partly open; A 1, door of the same as
        seen when closed; B, _Cteniza Californica_ (Camb.) from a
        living specimen; B 1, the same seen in spirits, the legs not
        represented; B 2, the same seen sideways; (figs. A, A 1, B, B
        1 and B 2, are of the natural size); B 3, the eyes, greatly
        magnified; B 4, the three claws terminating the tarsal joint
        of the hindmost left leg; B 5, line representing the measured
        length of the spider excluding the falces and spinners, the
        uppermost division gives the length of the caput terminating
        at the half-moon-shaped fovea, the middle division that of
        the thorax, and the lowest that of the abdomen, while the
        transverse line gives the breadth of the cephalothorax; B 6,
        eggs laid by the spider in captivity on the under side of the
        gauze which covered the box (the position is reversed here)
        of the natural size; B 7, the same magnified; B 8, another
        group of eggs, magnified; B 9, a portion of the same still
        more highly magnified; B 10, lines showing measured lengths
        of legs of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th pairs, and of palpus,
        with those of the several joints.

  Plate XVI., p. 211, fig. A.--Part of the nest of _Nemesia Simoni_
        (Camb.) taken at Bordeaux; A 1, _N. Simoni_ (Camb.) from
        life, of the natural size; A 2, the same seen in spirits,
        the legs not represented; A 3, the same seen sideways and
        magnified; A 4, the eyes, magnified; A 5, the thoracic fovea,
        magnified; A 6, line showing measured length of spider, (see
        above explanation of fig. B 5, plate XV.); A 7, lines showing
        measured lengths of legs of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th pairs,
        and palpus of spider, with those of the several joints. B,
        cephalothorax and abdomen of another specimen of _N. Simoni_,
        in which the proportions are different, taken from life, of
        the natural size.

  Plate XVII., p. 215, fig. A.--Part of the nest of _N. suffusa_
        (Camb.) taken at Montpellier; A 1, _N. suffusa_ (Camb.)
        from life, of the natural size; A 2, the same in spirits,
        seen sideways and magnified, the legs not represented; A
        3, another view of the same; A 4, the eyes, magnified; A
        5, length of spider (see above, fig. B 5, plate XV.); A 6,
        measurements of legs and palpus; B, _N. meridionalis_ (Costa
        and Sim.), male, from a specimen in spirits, of the natural
        size, legs not represented; B 1, the same magnified; B 2, the
        eyes, magnified; B 3, radial and digital joints of the left
        palpus with bulb, magnified; B 4, another view of the same,
        magnified; B 5, back view of the same, magnified, but less
        highly; B 6, length of spider (see above, fig. B 5, plate
        XV.); C, _N. meridionalis_ (Costa and Sim.) female, from a
        specimen in spirit of wine, of the natural size, legs not
        represented; C 1, eyes of the same, magnified; C 2, length of
        spider. These two specimens (male and female) were collected
        in Corsica, and named by M. E. Simon, who kindly presented
        them to me; they are now in the possession of the Rev. O.
        Pickard-Cambridge.

  Plate XVIII., p. 225, fig. A.--Part of nest of _N. congener_
        (Camb.) taken at Hyères; A 1, lower door of this nest viewed
        from above, of the natural size; A 2, side view of the same;
        A 3, _N. congener_ (Camb.) taken from life, of the natural
        size; A 4, side view of the same, enlarged to twice the
        natural size, the legs not represented; A 5, cephalothorax
        and falces from specimen in spirits, magnified;[1] A 6, the
        eyes, magnified; A 7, femur, patella (or genual joint) and
        tibia of leg of third pair, showing the three spines on the
        outer side of the patella, magnified. B, lower door from a
        smaller and younger nest, viewed from above, of the natural
        size; B 1, the same viewed sideways.

[Footnote 1: While these pages were passing through the press
(Hyères, Oct. '74), I have had an opportunity of examining 17
additional specimens of _N. congener_. I learn from this that the
pattern represented on the caput in fig. A 5, does not accord with
that in the majority of adult specimens, being usually less defined
and composed of three converging bands. Mr. Pickard-Cambridge's
description (p. 293 below) is, however, quite correct. I may mention
that three spines were present on the patella (genual joint) of legs
III in 16 specimens, the 17th specimen having but a single spine.]

  Plate XIX., p. 229, fig. A.--Nest of a young specimen of _N.
        Manderstjernæ_ (Ausserer = _N. meridionalis_ Camb., in "Ants
        and Spiders," p. 101) from Mentone, showing the descending
        cavity, with the lower door pushed across, so as to close
        the main tube and join the cavity; A 1, upper portion of
        the same, showing the lower door closing the branch. B,
        _N. cæmentaria_ (Latr.) from a living specimen taken at
        Montpellier; B 1, the same seen in spirits of wine, legs not
        represented; B 2, the eyes, magnified; B 3, one of the two
        larger claws; and B 4, the small claw of the tarsus of one of
        the hindmost legs; B 5, length of spider; B 6, measurements
        of legs and palpus. C, the eyes of _N. Moggridgii_ (Camb.)
        (= _N. cæmentaria_, Camb., in "Ants and Spiders," p. 92),
        magnified. D, _N. incerta_ (Camb.), male, from a specimen
        preserved in spirits, collected at Digne in the Basses
        Alpes, by M. E. Simon, who kindly lent me the specimen for
        examination, represented of twice the natural size, and
        without the legs; D 1, another view of the same; D 2, radial
        and digital joints of the palpus and palpal bulb, magnified;
        D 3, back view of the same; D 4, the eyes magnified. E, eyes
        of _N. dubia_ (Camb.), male (= _N. cæmentaria_, Sim.), from
        a specimen in spirits, collected in the Pyrénées Orientales,
        communicated by M. Simon, magnified; E 1, radial and digital
        joints of the palpus with palpal bulb of the same, magnified;
        E 2, another view of the same.

  Plate XX., p. 254, fig. A, _Cteniza Moggridgii_ (Camb.), male (=
        _Ct. fodiens_, Camb., in "Ants and Spiders," p. 89), from
        a living specimen taken at Mentone, of the natural size; A
        1, the same seen sideways, the legs not represented; A 2,
        cephalothorax and falces of the same; A 3, the eyes; A 4,
        radial and digital joints and the palpal bulb; A 5, another
        view of the same; A 6, one of the two large claws, and A
        7, the small claw of the tarsus of one of the legs of the
        hindmost pair; A 8, length of the spider and breadth of the
        cephalothorax; A 9, measurements of legs and palpus. (Figs.
        A 1, A 2, A 3, A 4, A 5, A 6, and A 7, are all magnified.)
        B, _N. Manderstjernæ_ (Ausserer), male (= _N. meridionalis_,
        Camb., in "Ants and Spiders," p. 101), from a living specimen
        taken at Mentone, of the natural size; B 1, the same seen in
        spirits and magnified to twice the natural size; B 2, the
        same viewed sideways; B 3, the eyes; B 4, tibia, metatarsus
        and tarsus of the right leg of the first pair showing the
        spine and process on the under and inner side of the enlarged
        tibia; B 5, right leg of the third pair showing the three
        short spines on the patella; B 6, one of the two large claws,
        and B 7, the small claw of the tarsus of one of the legs of
        the hindmost pair; B 8, radial and digital joints of palpus
        with palpal bulb; B 9, another view of the same; B 10, back
        view of the same (figs. B 1 to B 10, all magnified); B
        11, measurements of legs and palpus. C, tibia, metatarsus
        and tarsus of right leg of _N. Manderstjernæ_ (Ausserer),
        male, viewed from the under side and magnified, drawn from
        the original specimen belonging to Dr. L. Koch, collected
        at Nice, and described as _N. Manderstjernæ_ by Professor
        Ausserer. My best thanks are due to Dr. L. Koch for having
        enabled me to examine this valuable specimen. [In fig. C,
        the curved spine should bend towards, and not away from, the
        process on its right and inner side.]


LIST OF SPIDERS DESCRIBED.


  Cteniza Moggridgii, sp. n.     ♂        p. 254, pl. XX.    fig. A.
     "    Californica, sp. n.    ♀        p. 260, pl. XV.    fig. B.
  Nemesia cæmentaria (Latr.)     ♀        p. 264, pl. XIX.   fig. B.
     "    Eleanora (Cambr.)               p. 272.
     "    Moggridgii, sp. n.     ♀        p. 273, pl. XIX.   fig. C.
     "    incerta, sp. n.        ♂        p. 276, pl. XIX.   fig. D.
     "    dubia, sp. n.          ♂        p. 280, pl. XIX.   fig. E.
     "    Manderstjernæ (Auss.)  ♂ and ♀  p. 283, pl. XX.    fig. B.
     "    meridionalis (Costa)   ♂ and ♀  p. 289, pl. XVII.  fig. B.
     "    congener, sp. n.       ♀        p. 292, pl. XVIII. fig. A 3.
     "    suffusa, sp. n.        ♀        p. 295, pl. XVII.  fig. A 1.
     "    Simoni, sp. n.         ♀        p. 297, pl. XVI.   fig. A 1.




SUPPLEMENT TO HARVESTING ANTS.


During the short time which has elapsed since _Harvesting Ants and
Trap-door Spiders_ left the printer's hands, fresh material has
rapidly accumulated, and an assiduous search after these creatures,
and the continued study of their works and ways, has met with ample
reward and encouragement.

It was my wish, when originally publishing these observations, many
of which were due to the active co-operation of friends, to invite
my readers to take part with me in my pleasure and pursuits, so
that we should from that time work together, and, by communicating
our discoveries to each other, increase our knowledge, and at the
same time enlarge the field of our research. My intention was
that we should leave to others the necessary work of collection,
preservation, and arrangement, and that, while our fellow naturalists
pin specimens into classified cabinets, and devote long hours to the
description of peculiarities of form and colour, we should undertake
the lighter task of complementing their labours by observing and
recording the habits and conditions of existence of the creatures
themselves.

Looked at in this light, the present pages and those of the
preceding work may be regarded as so many drawers in our _Cabinet
of Habits_, and though, as we open drawer after drawer, many gaps
and blank spaces remind us how much remains to be done in order to
complete the collection, yet the interest and suggestiveness of
the specimen-facts already secured, should encourage and direct us
onwards. There have not been wanting instances in which my readers
have associated themselves with me in the way indicated, and it is
with pleasure, when reviewing the entire work, that I recall how
many of its most interesting features are due to the researches and
assistance of friends,[2] and commemorate at once their discoveries
and unfailing kindness. I had certainly expected that before this
time some new species of harvesting ants would have been discovered,
either on the Riviera, where attention has been especially called to
the subject, or in other parts of Europe, where dissimilar conditions
might have been expected to be associated with a different fauna; but
this has hitherto not been the case.

[Footnote 2: To all who have rendered me this valuable help I tender
my cordial thanks. I am under very special obligations to Mr.
Pickard-Cambridge, for descriptions of spiders, and to Mr. F. Smith
for the names of the Ants; assistance which I should have found it
almost impossible to dispense with or to replace.]

One might naturally suppose that if harvesting ants were discovered
in localities very widely distant from each other, they would prove
to belong to different species, but thus far, both in Europe and
Northern Africa, it is the same two well-known species of _Atta
barbara_ and _A. structor_ that constantly reappear.

For instance, I have recently learned that harvesting ants are found
at Cadenabbia on the lake of Como, and at Montpellier in Southern
France; but on examination, the ants from the former place are
clearly seen to belong to the species _structor_, and those from
Montpellier to the two species _structor_ and _barbara_.

I was greatly interested to receive specimens of ants, and of the
seeds which they were carrying and storing beneath the stones of a
paved road at Cadenabbia, for this is the northernmost point[3] at
which the habit of harvesting has as yet been noted. This discovery
suggests the possibility of the occurrence of the habit in the warmer
and more sheltered of the Swiss valleys. When at Montpellier in May
last I frequently observed long trains of ants bringing seeds and
small dry fruits to their nests, but these harvesters also turned
out on close inspection to be _Atta structor_ and _A. barbara_,
with its red-headed variety. These, it will be remembered, are the
only species of European ants which have as yet been proved to be
harvesters and seed-storers in the fullest sense of the term, that is
to say, which not only gather and carry seeds, but also store them in
large quantities below the surface of the ground.[4]

[Footnote 3: I have related in a note at the foot of p. 4 in _Ants
and Spiders_ how _Formica nigra_ in England, though paying no
attention to seeds generally, will sometimes collect the fresh seeds
of the sweet violet (_Viola odorata_).

When I published this account I was quite unaware that the fact that
certain English ants collect sweet violet seeds had been observed by
Mr. R. Wakefield forty years before.

This was communicated by Mr. Wakefield in a letter to Mr. John
Curtis, the substance of which was read before the Linnean Society
in 1854, and published in their Proceedings (see Proceedings of the
Linnean Society, ii. 293), where we read: "He (Mr. Wakefield) states
that he has seen the black species (_Formica nigra_, L.) for days and
nights together industriously occupied in dragging to its cells the
seeds of the common violet (_Viola odorata_, L.)

"He first noticed this fact on the 3rd of July, 1832; and he regards
it as a curious subject of inquiry for what purpose, if not for
their own future provision, they could accumulate these stores?" Mr.
Wakefield appears to accept this as evidence that these ants possess
the habit of storing seeds; but this is not so, as will be seen by
reference to my note alluded to above, and I am inclined to believe
that they collect these particular seeds either under the mistaken
belief that they are larvæ, to which when fresh they bear some
resemblance, or for the sake of some juices which they may obtain
from the fleshy appendage attached to the seed.]

[Footnote 4: Six other species belonging to the genus _Atta_ are
found in Europe, but they are all unknown to me.

It seems likely that, if other harvesting ants do exist in Europe
they may belong to one of these six species; for we have seen (_Ants
and Spiders_, p. 59) that all the ants which are known to possess
this habit are either members of the genus _Atta_ or belong to genera
closely related to it.]

In the case of _Pheidole megacephala_ (the only other European ant
which I have detected collecting seeds in large numbers), I have
never been able to find granaries or subterranean stores of any
kind, though I have frequently made extensive search for them, and
explored, to all appearance, the whole nest.

When we remember the great variety of ants which inhabit Europe alone
(a recent list[5] enumerating no fewer than 104 distinct species),
it certainly may seem strange at first that only two of their number
should possess this habit. Perhaps, however, we may yet discover
that some other of these species are true harvesters; but at present
the chances seem rather against it, since the harvesters found at
such distant points as Algiers, Cadenabbia, and Montpellier have all
turned out to belong to one or other of the two species, _structor_
or _barbara_.

[Footnote 5: _Description des Fourmis d'Europe pour servir à l'étude
des insectes myrmecophilis_, by Ernest André, in _Rev. et Mag. de
Zool._ 3^{e} ser. tom. ii. (1874), p. 152, &c.]

Indeed it may very well be that the numerical superiority and wide
distribution of these two species have served to secure to them a
more or less exclusive right to the habit of harvesting, for it
is clear that a given tract of country can only afford supplies of
grain to a limited number of colonies; so that, if these ants have
taken up the ground and are strong enough to maintain possession, no
others would have a chance. However this may be, I find that the more
insight I gain into the distinctive habits and relations of animals,
the more the belief impresses itself upon me that wherever we find
many closely-allied species inhabiting restricted areas, there we may
safely look for important differences among these species in respect
of their modes of life, and in the development of their instinct and
intelligence. And indeed this may be considered as a corollary of
the great law of natural selection, which uniformly tends to secure
the greatest possible amount of divergence in this respect, and to
prevent the co-existence in close proximity to each other of distinct
species having the same requirements and manner of life.

Thus, for example, even _Atta barbara_ and _structor_, though most
closely related as species, differ in habit; the former leading a
much more active life during the winter months at Mentone than the
latter, and seeking its home rather in wild than cultivated ground.
Then what differences different ants present in respect of strength,
speed, powers of offence and defence, numerical strength of colonies,
timidity, date and frequency of departure of winged ants from the
nest, odour emitted, combativeness, architecture and selection of
localities, nature of food, nocturnal and diurnal habits, and in
many other properties and conditions! It is doubtless owing to
dissimilarity in these and other respects that it becomes possible
for so many species to co-exist within very narrow limits, so that
even three or four distinct kinds sometimes form their nests so close
to each other that their galleries interlace and almost touch.

There are probably very few conditions of life (except those
concerned with the nature and manner of obtaining food) which have a
greater influence either in keeping creatures apart or in bringing
them into collision, than those which constitute differences in their
respective periods of activity and development. Thus, two species of
which one has nocturnal and the other diurnal habits, or of which
one is dormant while the other is active, may be said to travel
different roads and to be complete strangers to one another. Complete
separation of this kind is, of course, not the rule, and the greater
number of species find themselves in more or less constant rivalry,
but possess a sufficient number of points of dissimilarity in habit
and requirements to make their co-existence possible.

It is curious to note what little differences, as they seem to us,
may determine the fate of an ant. For example, the lizards will
lie in wait for and greedily seize and devour the winged males and
females of _structor_ and _barbara_, though they dare not attack the
assembled workers. It is curious to watch the way in which these
worker ants will protect the winged ants which are about to leave
the nest, by gathering round and swarming over them. When, as often
happens, the nest is placed in an old terrace-wall, one may see the
lizards creeping along or lying moulded into the inequalities of the
stones, all having their eager eyes directed towards the swarm. One
may then see the worker ants walk with impunity straight up to the
very noses of the lizards, while the male or female which should
chance to straggle in the same direction would infallibly be eaten
up. The lizards plainly show their fear of the workers by the way in
which, when they make up their mind to try a dash at some outlying
part of the ant colony, they leap through the lines in the utmost
haste as if traversing a ring of fire.

Now these worker ants are destitute of stings, and I can only suppose
that their power of combination, stronger jaws and more horny coats,
have gained them this immunity. I remarked that the smaller lizards
appeared to have some difficulty in dealing with the males and
females which they captured, and would beat and pound them against
the stones before devouring them, while the larger ones would often
make but one mouthful of them, swallowing wings and all!

If it were not for this body-guard of workers it is difficult to
see how the males and females in such situations could ever escape.
It is also plain that if the worker harvesting ants were as liable
to be seized and devoured as their winged companions, the species
would soon become extinct, for they expose themselves more than ants
ordinarily do, and their long provision-laden trains would be almost
at the mercy of any enemy which could attack them without fear of
results.[6]

[Footnote 6: Speaking of the enemies of ants, I may mention having
seen a young robin in England picking up and swallowing the workers
of _Formica nigra_ just as if they were crumbs. I knew that birds
would eat the male and female ants, but I had thought the workers
were exempt from their attacks, and, indeed, they must be so as a
rule, for otherwise they would speedily become extinct.]

Remembering this, it is interesting to note how differently the
tiger-beetle (_Cicendela_) behaves when hunting the powerful
harvesting ants and when preying upon the weak little _Formica
(Tapinoma) erratica_; for, while it seizes the latter without taking
any precautions, it is evidently more than half afraid of the former.

I have seen this beetle lying in wait near a train of _structor_ or
_barbara_ ants, watching until some individual separated a little
from the main body, when it would rush forward and make a snap at it,
retiring again as quickly as it came. If the tiger-beetle fails to
seize its prey exactly behind the head it will let it go again, and
two or three ants are often thus cruelly mutilated before a single
one is carried off.

No doubt the beetle has learned that if once this ant clasps its
mandibles upon either antennæ or legs, nothing, not even death
itself, will make it release its hold. It therefore tries to pin the
ant in such a way that it cannot use its formidable jaws. Perhaps the
habit of forming long compact trains may have been acquired by the
ants partly with a view to guarding against attacks of this kind.

The colonies of the little _F. erratica_, on the other hand,
apparently have to trust to their habit of working under the covered
ways which they construct, as well as to their activity and great
numbers for their preservation.

I had thought that the very powerful, and, to me, disagreeable, odour
of these little ants might have rendered them distasteful to the
tiger-beetle, but this is evidently not the case.

I have said above that, as far as our present knowledge goes, only
two out of the 104 species of European ants are possessed of the
habit of collecting and storing seed, and it may be reasonably asked
how it can have come about, if this is the case, that the ancient
authors were so well acquainted with the fact.

The explanation is that these writers lived on the shores of
the Mediterranean, where these two species--_Atta barbara_ and
_structor_--are extremely common objects, both on account of their
abundance and their habits. The long trains of harvesters remain
exposed to view for hours together, and _structor_ seeks the
neighbourhood or even the interior of towns, so that these ants
arrest the attention even of the unobservant, and often become
familiar as the sparrows.

There can be little doubt that these two ants display the same habits
throughout all the warmer districts which they inhabit, but whether
they do so in Switzerland, Germany, Northern France, and the other
colder portions of their range, remains one of the many interesting
questions which still await investigation.

Mr. F. Smith has recorded the presence of _Atta barbara_ in
Palestine, and I have lately obtained some curious evidence which
goes to show that harvesting ants not only carried on their
operations in times past in that country, but that their seed-stores
were on a much larger scale than any I have observed on the Riviera.

I am indebted to Dr. F. A. Pratt for the information that mention
was made of ants and their stores in the Misna, that codification of
the traditionary and unwritten laws of the Jews, which was commenced
after the birth of Christ under the presidency of Hillel, and which
has at least the merit of serving as a record of a multitude of very
ancient customs and observances which, but for it, would probably
have long ago been forgotten.

Now it so happens that the very first section of the Misna is called
_Zeraim_, and has to do with seeds and crops, and I was thus enabled,
without any very prolonged search, to light upon one of the passages
in question.[7] It occurs in a chapter entitled _De Angulo_ in the
Latin version, treating of the _corner_ of the fields bearing crops
which should be set aside for the poor, and of the rights of the
gleaners, and may be freely rendered as follows: "The granaries of
ants (_Formicarum cavernulæ_), which may be found in the midst of a
growing crop of corn, shall belong to the owner of the crop; but, if
these granaries are found after the reapers have passed, the upper
part (of each heap contained in these granaries) shall go to the poor
and the lower to the proprietor." And then is added: "The Rabbi Meir
is of opinion that the whole should go to the poor, because whenever
any doubt arises about a question of gleaning the doubt is to be
given in favour of the gleaner."

[Footnote 7: "Formicarum cavernulæ in media segete proprietarii
censentur; pone messores superiore parte pauperum, inferiore
proprietarii. R. Meir totum pauperum esse censet, quia quod dubium
est in spicelegio, spicilegium est." And to this the following
explanatory note is appended: "Formicarum cavernulæ, Frumentum inibi
repertum." Misna, Sect. I. Zeraim. Cap. IV. p. 25. Latine vertit et
commentario illustravit Gulielmus Guisius. _Accedit_ Mosis Maimonidis
_Præfatio in_ Misnam, Edo. Pocockio _Interprete_, Oxoniæ A.D. 1690.]

The intention of this very quaint bit of legislation, or rather
of the ancient custom which gave rise to it, appears to have been
the following; it was to settle once and for all a nice point of
conscience with reference to the claims of the poor upon these ant
stores. If the heaps of grain were found among the standing corn
before the reapers reached the spot or while they were still at
work, the proprietor might claim them without any hesitation; but,
if they were discovered after the passing of the reapers, then it
was conceivable that the ants, which during the whole time had never
ceased their labours, might have collected some of the grain from the
fallen ears of corn which lay upon the ground, and were the property
of the gleaners. These grains would be those which the ants had
collected most recently, and would therefore lie on the surface of
each granary heap. Thus it was settled that the upper portion of each
heap should belong to the poor, and the lower, that collected from
the standing crop, to the proprietor.

We may perhaps laugh at the notion of critically discussing and
legislating upon such a subject, and think that such a pitiful matter
might have been allowed to pass among those _minima_ about which even
the Jewish law need not care.

Be this as it may, it is interesting for us to learn that a custom of
the kind had its place among the recognised traditions of the people,
and that the harvesting ants of Syria had earned a place in these
records by amassing stores of sufficient size, and so disposed as to
make them worth collecting.

This reminds us of what M. Germain de St. Pierre has related (_Ants
and Spiders_, p. 29) of the extent of the depredations made among the
corn crops at Hyères by these ants; and doubtless other observers who
have opportunities for watching the ants during the summer months
might supply further confirmation.

It would be of interest to learn the extent and manner of concealment
of these large stores of grain, but, during the months from October
to May, I have never seen corn in any quantity in the granaries,
though there was frequent evidence of its late presence in the
dense masses of husks of oats and other large grain lying near the
nests. In October, 1873, I found near the entrances to a nest of
_structor_ a circular mound formed of this refuse, twenty-seven
inches in diameter, and averaging two inches in thickness, while
near other nests I have found the chinks between the stones of the
terrace-wall behind which the nest lay, literally stuffed with husks.
It was plain that these grains of cereals and the larger grasses
had been collected during the summer. The granaries in the winter
and spring contain the grains of some few of the autumnal grasses,
but are principally filled with seeds of the other more abundant
autumn-fruiting plants belonging to the neighbourhood.

I have now collected from the granaries of these ants the seeds or
small dry fruits of fifty-four distinct species of wild plants, and
on examination I find that during my stay in the south (from October
to May) the seeds of the distinctively spring and summer-flowering
plants are either entirely absent or are very scarce, while the
great bulk of the seeds belong to plants which ripen their fruits
in the autumn. Thus the grains of oats, of the large fescue and
brome grasses, of quaking grasses (_Melica_), and other kinds common
near the nests in May, are conspicuously absent in the winter, as
are the fruits of all the sedges but one, and this one (_Carex
distans_) retains its fruits till late in the autumn. Among other
spring-flowering plants common near the nests, the seeds of which
are also absent, I may mention violets (_Viola odorata_), poppies,
(_Papaver_), certain species of _Veronica_, _Helianthemum guttatum_,
_Silene quinque-vulnera_ and _Plantago Bellardi_.

Here a curious question arises--viz., What becomes of the large
stores of seeds which one may still find in the nests in May, when
the ants are busy pouring fresh supplies into the nest? The answer
probably is, that, as the weather becomes warmer, ever-increasing
calls are made by the larvæ upon the food-resources of the nest, and
that old and new seeds rapidly disappear together, and all the energy
and activity of the colony is needed to meet the increased demand.

Still, it would be interesting, if it were possible, to assure
oneself whether this is the case; that is to say, whether the
residue of the winter stores is really consumed during the summer,
or whether a portion of it remains in the granaries until the
following autumn. One might perhaps learn something as to this if
one had an opportunity of opening a nest late in July, and before
the characteristic autumn-fruiting plants had set their seed. If the
granaries were then principally filled with seeds of spring-fruiting
plants, and the winter seeds were almost or entirely absent, this
would afford tolerably good negative evidence in favour of the latter
having been eaten during the summer.

One thing is certain, and that is, that these harvesting ants do not
habitually abandon their nests every year. On the contrary, while
many swarms leave the nests at different seasons, a portion of the
original colony, or of its descendants, still remains in the old
home, and very few out of the many nests which I have watched during
the past three years, and of which I have noted and mapped the
positions, have been deserted. On my return to Mentone in October,
1873, I hastened to examine the nests between which war had been
carried on in the previous year (_Ants and Spiders_, p. 38), and
found in one case that the vanquished nest was completely lifeless
and abandoned, while the victorious colony was remarkably thriving,
and its granaries teemed with seeds. The locality occupied by the
other belligerent colonies had unfortunately been built over.

I have often been asked whether I could give an approximate estimate
of the quantity of seeds contained in a nest of average size, but
I have hitherto felt unable to do this in a satisfactory manner. I
am now in possession of more reliable data, and believe that the
following calculation may be taken as a near approximation to the
truth. During the spring of 1873 I removed with but very little loss
the contents of two granaries from a very extensive nest of _Atta
structor_, consisting principally of seeds of clover, fumitory, and
pellitory. These seeds, when perfectly clean and freed from earth,
weighed in the one case 4 sc. 4 grs., and in the other 5 sc. 8 grs.
Now there cannot have been less than eighty such granaries in this
nest, so that, if we take five scruples as the average weight of the
seeds in each granary, and this, allowing for loss in collection,
which we may fairly do, we should have a total weight of more than
sixteen ounces, or one pound avoirdupois weight of seeds contained
in the nest. But, though this mass of seeds represents the result
of infinite labour on the part of the ants, each individual granary
contains but an insignificant quantity, and the store-chambers often
lie at great distances apart; it is therefore impossible to believe
that the stores alluded to in the Misna can have been as small and
scattered as these were, and we must, on the contrary, suppose them
to have been both larger and more accessible.[8]

[Footnote 8: Perhaps these heaps of corn may have been piled up at
the entrance to the nest, as is sometimes the case when the workers,
in their eagerness to secure as much as possible of a passing
harvest, bring in the supplies too fast for their companions within
the nest to be able to find room for and accommodate. When this
happens the seeds lie outside the nest until fresh chambers are
prepared for their reception.]

The means employed by the ants to prevent the germination of the
seeds contained in their granaries still remain secret, and all the
experiments and investigations which I have hitherto been able to
make have failed to give me the clue.

The problem to be solved is the following: Given seeds, the readiness
of which to germinate has been proved, to place them in damp soil at
depths varying from half an inch to twenty inches below the surface
in such a manner that they shall remain there dormant, neither
germinating nor decaying, for weeks and even months. These very seeds
must be capable of germinating after the conclusion of the experiment.

This is what the ants do for millions of seeds, for the instances
in which a few seeds appear to have sprouted within the nest in
defiance of the ants, are very rare and wholly exceptional; and
when after prolonged wet weather germinated seeds are seen outside
the nest, it will usually be found that these have the little root
cut off, and are eventually carried back into the nest and used as
food. By a fortunate chance I have been able to prove that the seeds
will germinate in an undisturbed granary when the ants are prevented
from obtaining access to it; and this goes to show not only that the
structure and nature of the granary chamber is not sufficient of
itself to prevent germination, but also that the presence of the ants
is essential to secure the dormant condition of the seeds.

I discovered in two places portions of distinct nests of _Atta
structor_ which had been isolated owing to the destruction of the
terrace-wall behind which they lay, and there the granaries were
filled up and literally choked with growing seeds, though the earth
in which they lay completely enclosed and concealed them, until by
chance I laid them bare! In one case I knew that the destruction of
the wall had only taken place ten days before, so that the seeds had
sprouted in this interval.

My experiments also tend to confirm this, and to favour the belief
that the non-germination of the seeds is due to some direct influence
voluntarily exercised by the ants, and not merely to the conditions
found in the nest, or to acid vapours which in certain cases are
given off by the ants themselves.

In order to put this latter point to the test of experiment, I
confined about a hundred harvesting ants (_A. structor_), with their
queen and several larvæ, in a glass test-tube eight inches long and
one inch in diameter, closed with a cork and filled up to within
about an inch of the cork with damp sandy soil, most of which was
taken from the ants' nest.

I added six peas, six cress and six millet, and then kept the tube
tightly corked for nine days, only once removing the cork for a few
seconds in order to sprinkle a little water on the ants, which were
evidently in need of it. On the ninth day I turned out the contents
of the tube and found that all the peas, millet and cress, had
germinated and were growing strongly. One of the cress, however, had
had its root, which lay across the gallery constructed by the ants,
gnawed off; four clover seeds, which had come with the soil taken
from the nest, and which had formed part of the ants' stores, had
germinated also. Here the small quantity of air contained in the
test-tube must certainly have become saturated with any vapour which
the ants may be supposed to give off, and we cannot therefore accept
this as the cause of the dormant condition of the granary seeds.

I made other experiments in which harvesting ants were imprisoned
along with various seeds in small, cylindrical, closed vessels
containing a little damp sand. Here the vessels were frequently
rolled from side to side or shaken, during the twenty-two hours for
which the experiment lasted, so as to excite the ants and make them
give off such odours as they possessed, but no trace of injurious
influence was produced upon the seeds, which germinated and grew
normally afterwards.

At Mr. Darwin's suggestion I made a long series of experiments
with formic acid, in which measured quantities, pure or diluted,
were placed in a watch-glass on damp sand and surrounded by seeds,
the whole being enclosed in a covered tumbler, so that the effects
produced on the seeds by the vapour rising from the acid might be
noted. Similar seeds were sown at the same time and in the same
way, but without the acid, so as to permit of comparison. These
experiments have afforded some interesting results,[9] but do not
supply any positive data which might help us to discover the secret
of the ants. They narrow, indeed, the area in which search can
profitably be made, indicating as they do that the vapour of formic
acid is incapable of rendering the seeds dormant after the manner of
the ants, and showing, on the contrary, that its influence is always
injurious to the seeds, even when present only in excessively minute
quantities.

[Footnote 9: I hope shortly to offer these observations, together
with another series of a similar nature in which my friend Mr. J. B.
Andrews has taken part, to the Linnean Society.]

It appears to me now that the most promising field for experiments
made with a view to clearing up this difficulty, is that afforded by
the closer investigation of the phenomena of normal germination, and
by a study of the conditions under which seeds remain dormant, as
they are occasionally known to do, in situations which our general
experience would have selected as favourable to germination.

I have good hopes, also, that when we come to know more of the habits
of harvesting ants in tropical countries, and when naturalists have
excavated and described their subterranean stores--a thing which has
not yet been done as far as I know--we may gather fresh indications
to guide us in our search.

I am puzzled to account for the fact, which I have seen stated by
more than one observer in India, that the ants there have a habit
of bringing out large quantities of grain and seed and laying them
in heaps outside their nests at the commencement of the wet season.
Dr. King, the director of the Royal Botanic Gardens at Calcutta,
has told me that when in the Gwalior territory during the beginning
of the rainy season, he saw heaps of seeds, principally those of a
leguminous plant (_Alyssocarpus_), piled up round the entrances to
the ants' nests, and that it was precisely at that time that flocks
of a rock-grouse (_Pterocles exustus_) first made their appearance.
They fed freely upon the seeds, and Dr. King found the crops of some
of these birds, which he had shot, filled with them.

It is difficult to imagine why these Indian ants should turn out from
their nests the very seeds which it had cost them so much labour to
collect, and the more so as we find that these seeds are devoured
by birds. It seems just possible, however, that the ants, remaining
torpid during the rainy season, do not require the seeds, and know
that, under these circumstances, if left in the nest, they would
sprout, and choke up the galleries and granaries. Perhaps also they
may have learned that a certain number of the ejected seeds will
spring up and afford future harvests within easy reach of the nest.

All this, however, and especially the suggestion as to the dormant
condition of the ants during the rainy season, might easily be proved
or disproved by direct observation; and at present we have nothing
but mere speculation to go upon.

It is curious to find that the native population in a certain part
of India pay a kind of tribute to the ants, for Dr. King informs me
that the Hindoos in Rajputana, a province in which the old traditions
and superstitions retain especial hold, have a custom of scattering
dry rice and sugar for the ants, and thus apparently recognise both
their love of sweet things and their habit of collecting seeds.
It may be that this custom is now little more than a meaningless
rite; but in the past it probably had its origin, either in a wish
to propitiate the good will and avert the destructive attacks of
creatures which are the scourge and dread of entire districts, or in
a sentiment of combined fear and admiration--fear of the power, and
admiration of the energy, forethought, perseverance, and sense of
duty to the community displayed by these marvellous insects.

That the latter feeling may have had some share in prompting this
act is suggested by another custom which is stated[10] to prevail in
Arabia, in accordance with which an ant is placed in the hand of a
newly-born child, in order that its virtues may pass into and possess
the infant.

[Footnote 10: Freytag, paragraph under the Arabic word for Ant, in
his _Lexicon Arabico-Latinum_, vol. iv. p. 339, where he quotes from
a local dictionary.]

Among the many curious and obscure features in the economy of ants,
one of the most interesting is the occasional presence in their nests
of different creatures which live among and often in harmony with
them, the nature of the relations between host and guest being for
the most part quite unknown.

When examining the contents of some granaries from an extensive nest
of _Atta structor_ at Mentone last spring (1874), I found large
numbers of a minute, shining-brown beetle moving about among the
seeds. These little creatures were themselves not unlike some very
small seeds, and were of an elliptic form, measuring a trifle less
than one line in length. They proved to belong to the scarce and very
restricted genus _Coluocera_.[11] This species, named by Kraatz _C.
attæ_, on account of its inhabiting the nests of ants belonging to
the genus _Atta_, has been found in Greece.

[Footnote 11: I am indebted to Mr. F. Smith of the British Museum
for the name of this beetle and for the following reference to its
description; Kraatz in _Berliner Entomologische Zeitschrift_ for
1858-9, p. 140.]

Mr. Bates,[12] in his most interesting account of his travels on the
Amazons, remarks upon the singular fact, of which the above instance
is an example: "that some of the most anomalous forms of Coleopterous
insects are those which live solely in the nests of ants," and he
then goes on to allude to the strange snake _Amphisbæna_, a native
of that region, which also lives in the nests of the Sauba ants
(_Œcodoma cephalotes_), observing how curious it is that an abnormal
form of snakes should be found in the society of these insects. He
is of opinion, however, that the _Amphisbæna_ is not an inoffensive
guest, but lives upon the ants whose nest it selects for its home.

[Footnote 12: _Naturalist on the Amazons_, p. 61-2 (Ed. 2, 1864).]

Another remarkable inhabitant of ants' nests is a minute cricket, of
which I found a single example in the midst of a colony of black ants
at Mentone in February, 1874. This miniature cricket is scarcely as
large as a grain of wheat, the body, excluding the antennæ and other
appendages, measuring only two lines in length. It has been described
by Dr. Paolo Savi[13] under the name of _Gryllus myrmecophilus_. He
detected it in the nests of several species of ants in Tuscany, where
it lived on the best terms with its hosts, playing round their nests
in warm, and retiring into them in stormy weather, while allowing the
ants to carry it from place to place during their migrations.

[Footnote 13: Dr. P. Savi, _Osservazione sopra la Blatta acervorum di
Panzer_ in _Bibliotheco Italiana_, tom. xv. p. 217.]

_Gryllus myrmecophilus_ has also been observed in nests of the turf
ant (_Tetramorium cæspitum_) near Paris.[14]

[Footnote 14: _Bulletin Soc. Entom. de France_ (1872), p. li.]

At Mentone I have never found more than this one specimen, and the
ants among which it was domiciliated were of a species new to me
(_Camponotus_ (_Formica_) _lateralis_, Oliv.). This colony of ants
was composed of many winged males and females, as well as workers,
the last-named measuring from two and a half to three lines in
length, and black in colour. In other colonies I have found the
workers black, with red head and thorax.

Another ant, not enumerated in my list in _Ants and Spiders_, is
_Camponotus_ (_Formica_) _sylvatica_, which I detected in March last
under stones on Cap Martin, near Mentone. When disturbed, this ant
runs along with its abdomen raised vertically in the air, much as
the devil's coachhorse (_Staphylinus_) does. The same curious habit
of erecting the abdomen is found in another ant, not uncommon in
decaying wood in the South, _Crematogaster scutellaris_; and probably
all three insects adopt this threatening attitude, which is that of
the scorpion preparing to strike and sting, in order to intimidate
their enemies, though _Crematogaster_ is the only one which really
possesses a sting.

_Camponotus sylvatica_ has the same long legs and slender body as
_Formica cursor_, and is of about the same size; the workers, which
are of a dark brown colour, measuring about 3-1/2 lines in length.

Perhaps it may be well, in concluding these remarks on Harvesting
Ants, to call attention to the principal questions which still await
solution. The first is one which any observer who travels in Central
Europe during the summer may help to solve.

1. Do _any_ ants collect and store seed in Switzerland, Germany,
North France, England, or indeed in any of the colder parts of the
world?

2. What are the habits of _Atta structor_ and _A. barbara_ when
living, as they are known to do, in Switzerland, Germany, and
Northern France?

3. How do the ants contrive to preserve the seeds in their granaries
free from germination and decay?

4. How are the seed-stores of tropical ants disposed below ground,
and of what do they consist?

5. Do harvesting ants exist in the southern states of North America,
in Australia, New Zealand, or at the Cape?




SUPPLEMENT

TO

TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS.


There would doubtless be a just feeling of pride and satisfaction
in the heart of a naturalist who could say that he had made himself
thoroughly acquainted with all the species of a particular group of
animals, had learned their most secret habits, and mastered their
several relations to the objects, animate and inanimate, which
surrounded them. But perhaps a still keener pleasure is enjoyed by
one who carries about with him some problem of the kind but partially
solved, and who, holding in his hand the clue which shall guide him
onwards, sees in each new place that he visits fresh opportunities of
discovery. The latter is certainly the condition of those who take
an interest in searching out the habits and characters of trap-door
spiders; for this subject, far from being exhausted, expands under
the light of recently acquired facts, and invites research in many
parts of Europe, north as well as south.

We have only to compare the number of types of trap-door nest which
were known before the publication of _Ants and Spiders_, with those
at present recorded, to see how fruitful this field of inquiry has
already proved.

Before this little work was published, only one type of trap-door
nest was known in Europe: two new types were described in its pages,
and I have now the pleasure of being able to bring three more
hitherto unknown European types before the notice of my readers, thus
raising the number to six in all. I do not include in these six types
the very curious, and still imperfectly-known nest of _Atypus_;[15]
a spider which is a true representative of the trap-door group as
far as its structural characters are concerned, but which, although
it excavates a silk-lined burrow in the earth, does not appear to
construct any kind of door at the mouth of its tube.

[Footnote 15: See _Ants and Spiders_, page 78. _Atypus_ belongs to
the sub-family _Atypinæ_, a division which does not include any of
the _Nemesias_ or _Ctenizas_, and of which indeed _Atypus_ is the
only European representative.]

Much uncertainty still hangs over the habits of this spider, as the
facts hitherto recorded, though perfectly authentic, are difficult
to piece together into a satisfactory whole. One thing, however,
is clear, and that is, that the nests and habits of the spiders of
the genus _Atypus_ (of which, as Mr. Pickard-Cambridge, informs me,
two if not three distinct species inhabit England) merit attentive
study, and would most certainly repay it. Hastings, Portland, the
coast of Dorsetshire, and the neighbourhood of London and Exeter, are
the habitats hitherto cited for this spider, but I cannot doubt its
existence in many sheltered localities on the south coast of England.

The most recent contribution to our knowledge of this genus is
contained in a paper by M. Eugène Simon,[16] who describes three
species (two of which are new), as inhabiting France, and it remains
to be ascertained whether our British _Atypi_ agree in their
characters with any of these.

[Footnote 16: Note sur les Espèces françaises du genre _Atypus_,
Latr. in Ann. Soc. Entomologique de France, 5^e ser. tom. iii.
(1873), p. 109.]

He describes (p. 113-4) the nest and mode of life of _Atypus piceus_,
Sulzer (=_A. Sulzeri_, Latr.),[17] the commonest of the three
species, as follows:--"They (the spiders) seek dry and somewhat sandy
slopes, sometimes also woods, chiefly plantations of evergreens;
their retreat is always concealed either by stones, or in moss which
one must remove carefully and in large masses (_plâques_) in order to
detect them."

[Footnote 17: Thus named by M. Simon.]

"This Atypus excavates an oblique hole of 15 to 20 centimetres deep,
and of the size of its body; it lines it with a rather narrow silken
tube of a very close texture, the upper part of which, exceeding the
subterranean portion in length, lies horizontally on the surface
of the ground, and ends in an open tapering point. Near its lower
extremity the tube is suddenly contracted, and then dilates into
the form of a fairly spacious apartment, in which the spider lives;
the cocoon enclosing the eggs is suspended by a few threads at the
contraction. I have frequently surprised _Atypus_ in the act of
holding earth-worms in their falces, and I think that these Annelids
constitute the larger part of their food; indeed, if one examines
the lower portion of the silk chamber, one may remark a part where
the tissue is thinner and more transparent. I have not been able to
detect an opening, but it is probable that the _Atypus_ can easily
part the not very compact threads, and thus obtain for itself an easy
prey, and dispense with the necessity of ascending to the surface
of the ground. When taken out of its tube, _Atypus_ does not even
attempt to escape; it is therefore plain that it is not organized
for the pursuit of an active prey; and, on the other hand, the upper
extremity of the tube is ill-adapted for an ambuscade, being almost
closed, and without support. This small opening would seem to be
solely intended for the entrance and exit of the male (a very much
smaller creature than the female) during the breeding season, which
occurs in the month of October."

[Illustration: _Plate XIII_]

M. Simon says that this species of _Atypus_ is common in all the
centre, east and west of France, and that he has detected it in
great abundance in the neighbourhood of Troyes, in Champagne, in the
month of October, when the male was inhabiting the same tube with
the female.[18] I am greatly indebted to M. Simon for having given
me the specimen of a silk tube taken entire from a nest found in
this locality, which I have figured in Plate XIII., fig. A. It will
be seen that the tube has collapsed, but one may still trace the
enlargement near the base which forms the chamber, the elbow where it
is bent at the surface of the ground, the moss, scales, and fibres
of plants which are woven into, and serve to conceal the aërial
portion, and its termination in a twisted and apparently-closed mouth.

[Footnote 18: M. Simon has discovered another species of _Atypus_ at
Digne in the Basses Alpes which constructs a similar nest to that
described above. This species was detected for the first time by M.
Simon and described by him under the name of _Atypus bleodonticus_.]

Indeed, I believe that, in this specimen, the upper extremity of the
tube is really closed, for, when I succeeded in inflating this aërial
portion, the lips did not part, but remained drawn together.

It seems very extraordinary that the mouth of the tube should be thus
closed, so that the female spider becomes a prisoner, self-immured,
and I can only suppose that this is a temporary condition, limited
perhaps to the period during which she receives the visits of the
male.

At the very base of the tube I found a mass of earth, roots and
vegetable fibres, and in this I hoped to have detected the _débris_
of insects or other food, such as I sometimes find at the bottom of
and below the tubes of the trap-door nests in the South, but of this
there was no trace.

It is difficult to me to imagine how the spider could contrive to
live by the capture of worms, after the fashion suggested by M.
Simon; for who does not know the speed with which, on the slightest
alarm, worms draw back into their holes and escape pursuit, and the
muscular power which they exert in resisting any attempts to drag
them out of the earth?

M. Simon's account of the closed tube and capture of worms by this
spider corresponds, however, with that given by Mr. Joshua Brown, the
first discoverer of _Atypus_ in England.

This gentleman communicated his discovery to Mr. Edward Newman[19]
in 1856, since which time (with the exception of M. Simon's paper
quoted above) little or nothing seems to have been done to clear up
the points which remain doubtful in the history of these singular
creatures.

[Footnote 19: Note on _Atypus Sulzeri_ of Latreille, by Mr.
Edward Newman, read before the Linnean Society; a report of this
communication is given in _The Zoologist_, vol. xiv. (1856), p. 5021.]

Several nests of _Atypus_ were discovered by Mr. Joshua Brown in the
neighbourhood of Hastings, when traversing a lane bounded on either
side by high and steep sand-banks, partially covered with grass and
bushes.

His attention was at first arrested by the sight of "something
hanging down which looked like the cocoon of some moth;" but, on
closer examination, the silk case proved to be empty, and was
continued as a tube into the ground to a depth of 9 inches, where he
came upon the spider lying at the bottom. Further research revealed
the existence of a number of these nests in the same locality, but
the length of the different tubes varied much; they were usually
about 9 inches long, but some were much longer, often baffling his
attempts to follow them; the longest which he was able to secure
entire measured 11 inches. All the nests were, however, alike in
having a tubular silk lining, about 3/4 of an inch in diameter, a
part of which protruded from the ground for about 2 inches, and was
pendent, inflated, and covered with particles of sand, assimilating
it to the surrounding surface; it was closed at the upper extremity,
leaving no exit to the open air.

Mr. Brown took home some of these tubes in a collapsed state with
the spider at the bottom. In one case, on opening the box in which
the nest was placed, he perceived a movement throughout the tube,
as if it were being inflated; this however soon subsided, but the
following morning he was surprised to see that the whole tube was
inflated, especially at the end which had lain exposed on the bank.
He failed to find any aperture by which the spider could enter or
leave her nest, and his captives, though passing backwards and
forwards in their tubes, never came out at either end. He never saw
flies or any fragments of insects in the nests; but, on drawing out
one of the tubes, he observed a worm at the lower end, partially
within it, partially outside, and he perceived that the spider
had evidently been eating a considerable portion of its anterior
extremity.

It will readily be seen that there are some discrepancies between the
different accounts which have been given of the nests of _Atypus_
found in England and France,[20] and I think it quite probable that
some at least of the nests described may really differ, and be the
work of distinct species belonging to this genus. Mr. Brown describes
his nests as having by far the greater part of their length under
ground, while in those observed by M. Simon, as shown in my figure,
Plate XIII. fig. A, the exposed portion of the tube equalled or
exceeded the subterranean.

[Footnote 20: A subject already alluded to in _Ants and Spiders_, at
p. 78.]

An imperfect specimen at the British Museum, from some English
station (exact habitat not given), appears to have the proportions
described by Mr. Brown; the length of the aërial portion of the tube
being less than one-fourth of that of the subterranean; the upper
end of the tube is however open, but I am doubtful whether this was
originally so or not, for the silk is torn at this point, and the
opening may be a rent caused by rough handling.

After a comparison of the above description, it appears to me that
the following are the principal points which remain to be cleared up:

1. What is the precise structure of the nests of Atypus, and are they
always uniform in character at all seasons of the year?

2. What is the use of the exposed aërial portion of the tube?

3. Do the two British species make similar nests?

4. What food, besides worms, does the female live upon, and how does
she obtain it?

5. Does she ever leave the nest?

6. What becomes of these spiders and their nests in the winter, and
how long do they live?

7. When do the young leave the nest; and do they, like their
relatives in the South, construct nests like those of their parents
in miniature?

I would commend all these points to any lover of Nature who may
seek the southern coasts of England during the autumn and winter
months, and I think it more than likely that a careful search in
the sandy banks near St. Leonards, the slopes under the fir-woods
of Bournemouth, and the deep lanes in the neighbourhood of Torquay,
would be rewarded with success.

If the breeding season in England only commences in October, as
appears to be the case in France, it would seem most probable that
the spiders survive the winter. Very possibly these spiders and
their nests might be transplanted and placed for observation in a
garden; and if room were granted them in a greenhouse or Wardian
case, or even in a large flower-pot in a living-room, it is not
unlikely that the warmer temperature might waken them up to renewed
activity.

It seems clear that _Atypus_ has to fear the insidious attacks of
enemies; for not only is the external portion of the tube closed or
almost closed at certain seasons, but it is covered outside with such
materials as may serve to make it resemble the surrounding surface
of the ground. Thus Mr. Brown's nests, lying on a sandy bank, were
covered with particles of sand, while my specimen from Troyes has
moss and fibres of plants woven into its upper extremity.

Indeed, all the European representatives of the suborder
_Territelariæ_ which I have myself met with, conceal their nests
with great care and skill. There appear to be others, however, which
either make no nests at all but hide under stones, or only construct
a simple silk tube, open at the mouth, and without any special
contrivance for its dissimulation. Further observation of the habits
and dwellings of these apparently unworthy members of the trap-door
group is much to be desired.

Mr. Bates,[21] in his work on the Amazons, describes _Mygale
(Theraphosa) Blondii_, a large and powerful spider of that region, as
burrowing into the earth and "forming a broad slanting gallery about
three feet long, the sides of which he lines beautifully with silk."
This spider "is nocturnal in his habits," and maybe seen "just before
sunset keeping watch within the mouth of his tunnel, disappearing
suddenly when he hears a heavy foot-tread near his hiding place."

[Footnote 21: Bates, H. W., _Naturalist on the Amazons_, Ed. 2.
(1864).]

This nest would therefore appear to have an open tube undefended
by any door; but in this case the great size of the spider and the
depth of the burrow, which is more than twice as long as that of the
average European nests, may help to explain this apparent want of
precaution.

But, if we wish to learn with what different materials and by what
varied means the same end of self-preservation can be attained, we
have only to cast a glance at the sketch of a portion of a nest at
fig. B, Plate XIII., p. 183, where it will be seen that the entrance
to the nest, far from being concealed or obscured in any way, is
rendered a most striking object, and one which appears devised
for the very purpose of attracting attention. The nest to which I
refer is the work of _Cyrtauchenius elongatus_, from Morocco, and
consists, according to the account given me by its discoverer, M.
Simon, of a deep cylindrical burrow in the soil, the silk lining of
which is prolonged upwards for about three inches above the surface
of the ground, and enlarged into a funnel shape, so that it becomes
from two to three inches across at the orifice. This aërial portion
being snow-white, at once attracts the eye even from a considerable
distance, and the nests rising up amid the sparse grasses and other
small plants which serve to support but not to conceal them, present
the appearance of scattered white fungi.

This is therefore quite a new type among the nests constructed by
trap-door spiders, new in form and probably in function also, and I
would propose to distinguish it provisionally as the _funnel type_.

Now the female _Cyrtauchenius_ is, like its near relatives the
_Nemesias_, a sluggish and rather helpless creature, and shows no
apparent physical superiority which might countenance its dispensing
with the methods of concealment which form the characteristic habit
of the group.

How then does this spider manage to escape its many enemies,
especially the insidious attacks of the insects of the _Sphex_ and
_Ichneumon_ families, which certainly abound in Morocco?

Mr. Wallace, to whom I put the question, suggested that this species
may perhaps be chiefly nocturnal in its habits, and that, if this
is the case, the bright white and flower-like tube of the nest may
possibly serve to attract night flying insects, which would thus
become its prey.

In any case, whether we can discover them or not, some curious points
of difference must exist between this spider and its allies, which
secure to it a comparative immunity.

It appears to me that there are few questions which can be of greater
interest to the naturalist than those which have to do with the
conditions determining the existence of a given species in a given
place.

Of the questions, Who are your relatives? Where do they live? and How
are you able to live here? surely the last is not the least important.

And, if we wish to try to answer this question, we must do all in
our power to find out how the habits and conditions of life of the
creature in question, differ from those of its competitors; for we
may be quite certain that it does not exist where we see it by grace
and favour, but by merit; if it is neither stronger, cleverer nor
more numerous than its neighbours, we may be sure that it has found
some means of living which does not interfere fatally with their
requirements. Hence the endless diversity of function and habits in
all living creatures, which forms such a prolific and marvellous
subject for our study and contemplation.

I am indebted to M. Simon for permission to publish the details given
above on _Cyrtauchenius elongatus_, and also for having given me such
directions as enabled me to make the sketch from which the drawing at
Plate XIII., fig. B, was copied.

I must however state that this illustration is not taken from an
actual specimen, but is prepared solely from his description; so that
it cannot pretend to complete accuracy of detail. M. Simon assured
me nevertheless that it conveyed the general appearance of this
remarkable nest with sufficient fidelity, and I have been induced to
reproduce it here in the hope that it may serve to make my meaning
plainer, and to suggest the kind of object which one should look for,
if an opportunity offered.

Another species of the same genus, _Cyrtauchenius Doleschallii_, is
known to inhabit Sicily, but the nest is undescribed. M. Lucas has
described two species,[22] belonging to the closely-allied genus
_Cyrtocephalus_, both of which appear to construct nests somewhat
similar in form to that discovered by M. Simon. Whether these
nests are equally showy we cannot tell, as the account is brief and
few details are given; but one, that of _Cyrtocephalus terricola_,
appears to differ in having threads stretched from the opening of its
funnel, which serve to ensnare insects and to give notice of these
captures.

[Footnote 22: _Cyrtocephalus Walckenaëri_ and _terricola_, Lucas
(H.), _Animaux articulés de l'Algérie_ (Paris, 1847-9), vol. i. p.
94-5.]

The great trap-door group therefore comprises spiders which differ
widely in respect of their dwelling places. Some construct no nest
at all or only an irregular web, and live under stones; others,
like _Theraphosa Blondii_, make a simple cylindrical tunnel, or,
like those just described, a tube having a prolonged, uncovered,
funnel-shaped mouth: others again, belonging to the genus _Atypus_,
form the curious and as yet imperfectly-understood nests with a
silken tubular lining, part of which hangs down outside; while on the
highest rung of the architectural ladder, stand the builders of the
veritable trap-door nests.

It seems quite possible that, when we know more of the structures
made by _Territelariæ_ generally in various parts of the world, we
shall find that nests of various degrees of complexity and perfection
of structure exist, bridging over the gulf between the barbarous
dwellers under stones and the highly civilized inhabitants of the
branched wafer and cork nests.

Indeed, thanks to recent discoveries, I am already able to do
something of this kind for one small group of spiders, namely, for
that of the European _Nemesias_ having nests with wafer doors.

[Illustration: _Plate XIV._]

I hope to make this plain by reference to the diagrams on Plate XIV.,
where the figures C, D, E, F, and G represent on a reduced scale five
types of wafer nest constructed by as many distinct spiders, and
where a gradation may readily be traced between the simplest type at
C and the most complicated at G; but we shall speak more fully of
this matter by-and-by.

In these diagrams I have placed that representing the nest of
_Atypus_ on the extreme left (A);[23] next to this stands that
of a nest of the cork type (B), a type which must be carefully
distinguished from all the rest. It must not be supposed that the
solid cork door (so called from its resemblance to a short cork
closing the neck of a bottle), is nothing more than a thicker edition
of the wafer door; it is not so, but, on the contrary, possesses a
very characteristic structure of its own, being composed of many
layers of silk, each furnished with a sloping rim of earth, while the
wafer door consists of but a single layer of silk.

[Footnote 23: These types may be briefly enumerated as follows:

  A, nest of _Atypus_.

  B, cork nest, and B, 1, layers of silk and earth forming the door of the
     cork nest.

  C, single-door, unbranched wafer nest.

  D, single door, branched wafer nest.

  E, double-door, unbranched wafer nest, and E, 1, lower door of the same.

  F, the Hyères double-door branched wafer nest, and F, 1, lower door of
       the same.

  G, double-door branched cavity wafer nest, as seen in the oldest and
     largest specimens, and G, 1, the same in the younger specimens.
     G, 2, the lower door of this nest, being of the same form in young
     and old nests.
]

I have represented at B 1 the 14 layers of silk and earth which went
to make a single cork door examined by me. It will be seen that the
outermost of these layers is the largest, and the innermost the
smallest, and I have already (_Ants and Spiders_, p. 150) shown
reason for believing that the latter constituted the first door the
spider ever made, and that the consecutive layers mark successive
stages in the enlargement of the nest.

There is therefore a broad distinction as to construction between
cork nests and wafer nests; moreover, while the former are, as far
as we know at present, all of one type, and only differ in size or
proportion, the latter appear under five distinct types.

Thus, every known cork nest, whether found in Europe, America, or
the Antipodes, has the same solid door and simple tube; while of the
wafer nests, some have branched and others simple tubes, and some
again possess a lower door in addition to the upper or surface door.

In the following pages I intend to treat of the trap-door spiders and
their nests in the same order in which the latter are placed in the
diagram, commencing with those of the cork type B, and then dealing
successively with the several wafer nests from C to G. We have
already spoken of A, the nest of _Atypus piceus_, and seen that our
present knowledge of this nest, of the habits of its occupant and of
those of its relations, is still far from complete.

The cork type is, as my readers will perhaps remember, the great
cosmopolitan type which ranges round the world, and which, curious to
say, is built by many different spiders belonging to distinct genera.

The idea of planning this very perfect bit of mechanism appears to
be the common inheritance of these several spiders, separated though
they are by wide intervals of geographical space as well as to
structural divergence.

At Mentone two distinct spiders construct nests of the cork type,
one of these being a _Nemesia_ and the other a _Cteniza_. They are
as unlike each other as they well can be, and it seems remarkably
strange that their nest-building instinct should be so similar. The
nest of the _Cteniza_ is indeed shallower than that of the _Nemesia_,
and a practised eye can usually trace a difference between the
slightly less angular lower surface and more semi-circular outline
of the door of the former, and the more abruptly bevelled and more
circular door of the latter.

These spiders and their nests have been already described and figured
in _Ants and Spiders_ under the names of _Ct. fodiens_ and _Nemesia
cæmentaria_. Recent discoveries have however shown that these spiders
possess distinctive characters of their own, and, though closely
allied to the species indicated, should be separated from them.

Last spring when pulling down an old terrace-wall (by permission) I
had the good fortune to discover the very remarkable male _Cteniza_
drawn at fig. A, Pl. XX., p. 254. I found no trace of a nest or web
of any kind, and the spider was merely hiding between the stones.

There appears to be scarcely any doubt that this is the male of the
female Mentonese _Cteniza_ which has, up to this time, been called
_Ct. fodiens_. A comparison with typical specimens of the true _Ct.
fodiens_ from Corsica, has however shown that the two are certainly
distinct, and Mr. Pickard-Cambridge[24] now describes the Mentonese
form under the name of _Ct. Moggridgii_.[25]

[Footnote 24: Mr. Pickard-Cambridge has once more kindly undertaken
the task of naming and describing my collections of trap-door
spiders, and the results of his labours will be found at the end of
the present work.]

[Footnote 25: I take this opportunity of thanking him for the
compliment. A description of this new species will be found at p.
254, below.]

The females of the true _Cteniza fodiens_ are far larger than those
of our new Mentonese species, and construct their nests in dry and
exposed places, instead of in the moist and shady ivy-covered banks
selected by the latter. I have found _Cteniza Moggridgii_ at San Remo
and Mentone, and it will probably be also discovered at Nice, but I
failed to detect it either at Cannes or Hyères.

The Corsican male at the first glance curiously resembles that found
at Mentone, but differs essentially in details and especially in
having the surface of the caput unbroken, whereas the caput of the
latter presents a very peculiar character in an impressed line which
runs across it from side to side (figs. A 1 and A 2). Both agree,
however, in being strangely unlike their females.

The other builder of a nest of the cork type at Mentone was, as has
been already stated, described and figured in _Ants and Spiders_
under the name of _Nemesia cæmentaria_. Now the true _N. cæmentaria_
of Latreille is found at Montpellier, the classical habitat where the
first discovery of trap-door spiders in Europe was made towards the
end of the last century, but its true characters have been hitherto
but imperfectly known.

I have lately been able to secure several specimens at this place,
and they certainly differed in their markings from the so-called
_cæmentaria_ of Mentone. M. Simon had previously informed me that
he considered our Mentonese spider distinct from the typical
_cæmentaria_, and had kindly proposed to give my name to the
Mentonese species; and now Mr. Pickard-Cambridge, on the receipt
of the specimens collected by me at Montpellier, coincides with M.
Simon, and adopts his nomenclature, calling the Mentonese _Nemesia N.
Moggridgii_.[26]

[Footnote 26: See below, p. 273.]

I found but one nest of the cork type at Montpellier, where it was
most abundant, and invariably inhabited by the same spider, so that
there can be little doubt that this is the celebrated _Nemesia
cæmentaria_ of Latreille, the nests of which were described by the
Abbé Sauvages in 1763.

When living, the pattern on the abdomen is far more distinct and is
traced on a paler ground than in _N. Moggridgii_, and the patterns
on the back of the caput, as seen in specimens preserved in spirits,
and the relative sizes of the lateral eyes, as well as other details
enumerated by Mr. Pickard-Cambridge, afford characters by which they
may be known apart; and it is probable that when the males, which
are at present unknown, shall be discovered, they will be found to
present other distinctive peculiarities. In the present instance
we have the reverse of the case described above, in which two very
distinct spiders constructed a similar nest, for here both spiders
and nests are much alike.

We have yet to learn what are the special advantages which each
type of nest affords; but it is plain from the fact of the
same type being adopted indifferently by both nearly- and most
distantly-related spiders, that the form of the nest is governed far
more by the conditions which it is contrived to meet, than by the
affinity or resemblance of the spiders which construct it.

I have found _N. Moggridgii_ at San Remo, Mentone, Cannes, Hyères,
and Marseilles, but thus far, I only know of the true _N. cæmentaria_
at Montpellier.

The latter spider is rather bolder than the former, and I frequently
saw it at Montpellier watching at the slightly raised door, with the
tips of the claws projecting from the nest, and it rarely failed to
resist most vigorously any attempt of mine to force the door open.

During the summer of 1873, I received two specimens of trap-door
nests from California. Both of these nests were of the cork type and
nearly entire, wanting only a small portion of the base of the tube;
they most closely resembled one another and were probably the work
of the same spider. For one of these, coming from the San Joaquin
valley, between the Calaveras and the Tejon, I have to thank M. J. C.
Puls, a Belgian entomologist residing at Ghent; and for the other,
containing the spider which had constructed it _alive within its
tube_ (!), I am indebted to Mr. G. H. Treadwell of San Francisco. The
former nest is drawn at fig. A, Plate XV., and the spider[27] from
the latter at fig. B of the same plate.

[Footnote 27: This spider, which proves to be a new species, is
described below (p. 260) as _Cteniza Californica_.]

[Illustration: _Plate XV._]

Mr. Treadwell had carried this spider and its nest, with the block
of earth in which it lay, all the way from Visalia, a town about 350
miles south of San Francisco, where he had taken it; the nest and
spider travelled safe to London enclosed in an empty cocoatina tin,
4-1/2 inches deep, and 2-3/4 across.

The nest was then entire, for these spiders appear to make singularly
shallow tubes; and it might have remained so up to the present day
had it not been for the rash curiosity of a chambermaid in the London
hotel where Mr. Treadwell was staying, who, smitten with a great
desire to learn what the heavy little box which came from the land of
gold might contain, proceeded to examine the earth, when the sudden
appearance of the spider frightened her so much that box and nest and
all were thrown with a crash upon the floor.

Were it not for this unlucky incident I might have seen a complete
specimen of this curious nest; but as it was, though the spider
miraculously escaped uninjured, the bottom of the nest was pounded
into dust, and only the upper portion remained intact.

Both this nest and that sent to me by M. Puls, were of the true cork
type, and presented a solid door with a bevelled edge, fitting into
the correspondingly bevelled lip of the tube, and shutting flush with
the surface of the ground. The lining of the tube was strong and
thick, but soft and silky to the touch.

The tube itself in Mr. Treadwell's specimen, when intact, cannot have
measured more than 3-1/2 inches in length; and we learn from Dr.
Lanzwert, who collected the other specimen, that the average length
of these nests does not exceed three inches. Dr. Lanzwert, writing
in one of the local papers[28] of "The Mygales or Ground Spiders,"
says, "the poisonous black tarantulas, so well known to naturalists,
are extremely common in California, but only in places upland, or
lowland which are very hot and dry. Their principal haunts are the
San Joaquin valley, between the Calaveras and the Tejon. A similar
species from the coast is not only smaller than the interior variety,
but the colours are much deeper. They both make a curious habitation
under the ground, composed of a glutinized, web-worked purse, about
three inches long, and which is furnished with a tightly-fitting lid
which they can open or shut at pleasure, and which is as cunning a
piece of insect architecture as is to be found in nature. These ugly
loathsome Californian spiders are often mentioned by thoughtless
scribes as carrying no more danger than a common wasp, like the
species of Italy, but it is well known that several persons, young
and old, have lost their lives in this State from the bite of such
tarantulas as are met with in our coast and interior country. Their
enemy in the Tulare valley is an immense shining black wasp,[29]
fully an inch long, which will pounce upon them, and after a short
battle drag the tarantula along in the most valiant style of heroic
conquest. These interior tarantulas are often seen measuring two
inches in the spread."

[Footnote 28: _The Evening Bulletin_ for Oct. 25, 1866.]

[Footnote 29: This insect was probably not a true wasp, though
belonging to an allied family; it may perhaps have been a _Pepsis_,
certain species of which genus Mr. Bates informs me he has frequently
seen near Santarem on the Amazon, hawking over the ground where the
huge trap-door spiders lived, and suddenly pouncing down upon one of
these creatures, often many times larger than themselves, when, after
paralysing their victim with their sting, they would deliberately saw
off the legs before dragging away the bodies!]

Mr. Treadwell was quite as much impressed as Dr. Lanzwert with the
belief that the bite of these spiders is fatal, but it does not
appear that either of these gentlemen have obtained conclusive
evidence in support of this allegation.

I have occasionally been bitten by the trap-door spiders in South
France, but have never experienced the slightest subsequent
inconvenience, nor was there any trace of inflammation or poisoning
about the punctures which they made. Mr. Blackwall[30] has made a
very careful set of observations on this head, and has caused some of
the largest species of British spiders to bite his finger and wrist
until the blood flowed, without the slightest ill effects. He also
inoculated himself at the same time with the poisonous secretion of
the spider and with that of the wasp; when the latter wound became
extremely painful, while the former was not perceptibly aggravated.
Mr. Blackwall obtained the spiders' poison by causing a spider to
seize a slip of clean glass with its mandibles, when a small quantity
of a liquid showing a slightly acid reaction was deposited.

[Footnote 30: Mr. J. Blackwall, _Researches in Zoology_, ed. 2, 1873;
chapter on "The Poison of the Araneidea," pp. 240-256.]

Mr. Treadwell informed me that these Californian trap-door spiders
leave their nests in the daytime, and may be seen walking by the
roadside, though they are always prepared to hurry back to their
nests on the approach of danger.

I received the spider which I have represented at fig. B, Pl. XV.,
p. 198 (_Cteniza Californica_), from this gentleman alive, and still
within the remaining portion of her nest, on the 6th of July, 1873.
She then had the legs and cephalothorax of a brownish-black, and
the abdomen of a dull, uniform, dusky chocolate brown, but with an
indistinct median line near the anterior end on the upper side,
intersected at right angles by a shorter line. Mr. Treadwell said,
however, that when captured, this spider was much darker, and of a
pitchy black colour. The hairs all over the body were short, but
especially so on the abdomen, which had the appearance of cloth or
felt.

This creature in many ways recalls _Cteniza fodiens_ of Corsica, and
in a less degree the _Cteniza_ of Mentone and San Remo.

We find not only the same general form of body, but also the same
claws furnished with only one tooth, instead of many as in _Nemesia_,
and other distinctive features; and it is interesting to observe in
the nest that the more semi-circular form of the door and the wider
hinge also connect it rather with _Cteniza_ than with _Nemesia_.

Here, as in all spiders yet observed in cork nests, we find the habit
of resisting any attempt to open the door, and many a time when I
have wished to raise the lid in order to drop in flies or other
food, I have been obliged to desist because the bending blade of my
penknife showed that I should injure the nest if I used greater force.

No doubt the shallowness of the nest is an advantage to its occupant
in one way--namely, that it enables the spider to start up at the
shortest notice, and cling on to the door.

It is curious to find that, far as California is removed from the
Riviera, the same habits of construction and self-defence are common
to the spiders of both countries, and that the bond of kinship sets
time and space at defiance.

I kept this spider all through the summer and early autumn at
Richmond (Surrey), sprinkling the nest from time to time with water,
and constantly supplying its inhabitant with flies, wood-lice,
grasshoppers, earwigs, and other similar dainties. She did not,
however, seem eager for food, and the insects provided for her, and
actually placed within the nest, were often turned out again almost
untouched.

When I placed living insects, such as grasshoppers, for example,
within the nest over-night, she would often allow them to remain
there unharmed, so that I found them ready to escape on opening the
door the following morning.

I never saw her leave the nest of her own free will, and when I made
her come out and set her to run in the garden, she began at once to
seek for a place to hide in, hobbling along in an ungainly way and at
a slow pace.

She must, however, have left the nest on more than one occasion,
unseen by me, for she deposited several clusters of eggs at various
times upon the under-surface of the gauze net which was fastened over
the mouth of the box in which she was imprisoned.

The first of these groups of eggs was laid during the night between
the 12th and 13th of July, and formed a raspberry-shaped cluster
attached to the gauze.

I have represented this cluster of the natural size at fig. B, 6, and
magnified at fig. B, 7, on Plate XV., only in an inverted position,
for they really hung downwards from the under side of the net.

These eggs were greyish white or pale brown, and varied in shape from
globose to oblong.

All were very small, the largest only measuring 1/2 line in its
greatest length, but it is doubtful whether any of these eggs were
fertile, and, though they appeared full and plump, many presented an
irregular and fissured surface.

A fortnight later (July 27) another cluster of eggs was laid, and
this time between the hours of five and eight P.M. When the lamp was
brought in at the latter hour, I perceived what I took to be a drop
of water hanging from the gauze cover above and rather in front of
the spider's door, the very position occupied by the cluster of eggs
previously described. On closer inspection this proved to be a drop
of a pellucid colourless liquid, in which some thirty eggs floated.
One egg was laid on the gauze at some distance from the main group,
and several were also attached to the inside of the tin box.

At midnight I found that the drop had coagulated and contracted, and
by the following morning the mass was quite dry and resembled the
former group, only that it was not quite so convex.

Some of the eggs forming this cluster were much larger than any in
the preceding one, and one measured as much as a line in length by
half a line in breadth. This group is shown magnified at fig. B, 8,
Plate XV., and some of the separate eggs more highly magnified at
fig. B, 9.

Between this date and the end of November when the spider died, eggs
were laid on seven distinct occasions--viz., on July 31, August 11,
15, 31 (when I again found the eggs floating in a drop of liquid,
having been deposited on the gauze between two and half-past four
o'clock in the afternoon); September 9 (23 eggs laid on the earth
near the entrance to the nest); September 19 (about 30 eggs on the
gauze), and November 4 (about 30 eggs on the gauze).

Thus, between July 13 and November 4, this spider laid nine clusters
of eggs, all but one of which were placed on the same part of the
gauze cover, above and a little in front of the door, and the total
number of eggs deposited cannot have been less than 250. It is
difficult to understand why she should have laid these eggs outside
the nest, unless indeed she knew them to be sterile, and so treated
them as refuse. I can scarcely believe that such a procedure is in
accordance with the ordinary habits of these spiders; for, if the
eggs and young are habitually exposed, then the perfect concealment
of the nest would lose one of its most important uses. When we
remember that there are minute hymenopterous insects which lay their
eggs within the eggs of the spiders, we can see how important it
may be that the entrance to a nest, which is at once nursery and
stronghold, should be closed by a well-fitting door, and one which
may exclude, not only the larger and more powerful enemies of the
full-grown spiders, but also the tiny and almost imperceptible
assailants of the eggs and young.

This Californian spider was always careful to eject from the nest
the remains of insects with which I had supplied her, and, as she
did so deliberately and by day as well as by night, I had frequent
opportunities of watching her. Sometimes, if not alarmed by any
sudden movement, she would remain for one or two minutes at the mouth
of the nest with the door partly raised, and I was glad to seize
these opportunities for making some experiments, with a view to
learning whether she would prove as sensitive to sound as she did to
other vibrations and to the sight of moving objects.

Placing myself so that the partly-opened door screened me from her
view, I was able to approach close to the nest without causing her
alarm, and to make different sounds and noises at distances varying
from three to fourteen inches.

In no case, however, did she pay the slightest attention; and neither
shrill and sudden whistling, deep chest and buzzing sounds, an octave
of piercing notes struck upon brass bells, my best imitation of
the whirring of the fern owl, or finally, the angry hum of a large
humble-bee imprisoned in a paper box, and held within three inches of
the door of the nest, appeared to produce any kind of effect. This
surprised me, I confess, for, though I am aware that no auditory
apparatus has as yet been discovered in spiders, I can scarcely
believe that they stand at so great a disadvantage as creatures would
seem to do which lack the power of hearing.

These experiments must not, however, be taken for more than they are
worth; and the results obtained may have been due rather to apathy
in the individual spider than to a want of perception in the race
generally. In any case they suggest the need of further experiment
and observation in this direction.

In October I carried this Californian spider out with me to Mentone,
and she lived there and appeared plump and well until the end of the
following month, when she suddenly died, having laid one more group
of eggs in the interval. On examination, I found a dark brown spot on
one side of the abdomen, and this, I think, probably indicates that
her death was caused by some insect of the ichneumon family, which
had laid its eggs within the spider's body, after having stabbed it
at the place indicated by the discolouration.

Not very long before this melancholy event occurred, I had put the
spider to some inconvenience in order to secure her portrait from
life, to effect which I took her from her nest and placed her in a
deep china saucer.

She exhibited the strongest dislike to exposure, and sought to hide
herself even under a fold of blotting-paper which lay in the saucer
with her. I also noted that she appeared quite incapable of walking
up the sides of the saucer, and it would therefore seem that she was
destitute of the viscid hairs which enable some spiders to traverse
glazed and polished surfaces.

Seeing this anxiety on the part of the spider for concealment, it
came into my mind that, perhaps, if she were placed on the surface
of a pot full of garden mould she might excavate a tunnel in order
to hide herself from view. This I accordingly did in the evening of
November 15, and on the following morning I was delighted to find
that she had commenced to dig and was still at work.

In little more than an hour's time the hollow had become about the
size of half a walnut, and resembled in its nearly semi-circular
outline and size the surface of the door of her own nest. I was
greatly pleased to be able to watch the creature at the work of
excavation, a sight which I believe no naturalist has ever had before.

The legs took no part in the digging, and the palpi were but little
used, the mandibles and their fangs being the implements chiefly
employed. As soon as a little earth had been loosened and gathered
up, the spider walked up to the edge of her excavation and deposited
there her mouthful of particles of earth, separating and working the
mandibles up and down in the effort to part with the pellet, which
had been carried between the fangs and the mouth-organs. Each pellet
was very small, and the operation appeared to be excessively tedious
and laborious. I had expected to see the spider scrape out large
quantities of earth at a time, and either drag it backwards or kick
it out behind her as a terrier does when working at a rabbit-burrow;
but no, every little pellet removed was carried forwards, and
deposited separately on the "tip."

On the two following days, the 17th and 18th November, the spider
remained almost inactive, and brooded over the cavity she had made,
and which still remained too shallow to conceal or even contain her.
At 4 P.M. on the latter day I made a hole for her in the earth, and,
after some indecision, she took possession of it. Next day, however,
finding that she remained motionless in the hole which I had made,
and displayed no apparent intention of either lining it with silk or
furnishing it with a door, I replaced her in her own nest.

Within a few days after this date I found her dead at the bottom of
her tube, and at first I was inclined to fear that the treatment
to which she had lately been subjected might have caused her end.
When, however, I detected the brown spot on the side of the abdomen,
described above, and which so strongly recalled the marks frequently
observable in caterpillars attacked by ichneumons, I came to the
conclusion that she had really died from the internal injuries caused
by the gnawing of these cruel parasites; and that the eggs, laid long
before by one of these insects, had been hatched within her body
and developed into larvæ, which, living upon her tissues, had at
length destroyed some vital part. It is surprising that a creature,
carrying within itself such a fatal brood, should not only live,
but be capable of undergoing such adventures and misadventures as
this travelled spider endured with seeming indifference; but similar
facts are familiar to all those who have attended to the rearing of
caterpillars, and the frequent disappointment caused by the death of
apparently sound specimens which have been attacked in this way is
but too well known.

It would appear that _Cteniza Californica_ is peculiarly amenable to
captivity, and indeed to captivity of the strictest kind.

My specimen lived during all the time she was in my possession
in a cocoatina tin, a cylindrical box 4-1/2 in. deep and 2-3/4
in. in diameter, which always stood among the books and papers on
my writing-table. It is probable that those trap-door spiders
which inhabit nests with short tubes, and which therefore can be
transported nest and all, would be less disconcerted by imprisonment
than is the case with other kinds living at the bottom of a long
burrow which it is almost impossible to carry away entire. This is
borne out by what has been related (_Ants and Spiders_, p. 122) of
the habits of _Cteniza ionica_ in captivity, which not only endured
to have its nest set upside down in a flower-pot, but actually
furnished the inverted base of the tube with a door appropriate to
its new position.

Canon Tristram (the well-known author and naturalist) was so kind
as to send me two trap-door nests from Palestine for inspection;
these were small cork nests, the doors of which resembled those
of the Mentonese _Cteniza_ (_Ct. Moggridgii_), but the tubes were
exceedingly short, and that of the more perfect specimen, as I gather
from Canon Tristram, measured only two inches and an eighth in length
when entire.

The nests of _Cteniza ionica_ are but little longer, and that of the
Mentonese _Cteniza_, though never so shallow as these, are far less
deep than those of _Nemesia cæmentaria_, the builder of the typical
cork nest.

And now we will leave the nests of the cork type and their
inhabitants, and turn to the more intricate group of nests belonging
to the wafer type. Following the order indicated in the diagrams, we
will begin with the simplest type of all, fig. C, and afterwards take
the remaining types one after the other, advancing until we reach the
most complex type, G. The nest represented diagrammatically at fig.
C, in Plate XIV., is shown of the natural size in Plate XVI., with
the spider (_Nemesia Simoni_, Camb.) which constructs it (fig. A 1).

[Illustration: _Plate XVI._]

It belongs to the single-door unbranched wafer type, of which one
example has already been described in the West Indian nest (see _Ants
and Spiders_, p. 79, fig. B in woodcut); for, though this latter has
a shorter tube and a much stouter silk lining than is the case with
its European representative, there does not appear to be sufficient
difference to justify their separation as distinct types.

This, which is the simplest known form of trap-door nest, is quite
new to Europe, and the spider inhabiting it proves also to be one
hitherto undescribed; it has received from Mr. Pickard-Cambridge,
the name of _Nemesia Simoni_,[31] being so called in honour of M. E.
Simon, the well-known arachnologist.

[Footnote 31: Mr. Pickard-Cambridge describes _N. Simoni_ at p. 297
below. This species is remarkably well characterized, an assertion
rarely to be made in the case of those _Nemesias_ of which, as in the
present instance, the female only is known. The elevated, rounded,
and glabrous caput at once distinguishes it, not to speak of other
peculiarities. Mr. Pickard-Cambridge alludes to the presence, in the
specimens forwarded to him in spirits, of two singular indentations
on either side of the caput (fig. A 3, Plate XVI.). I did not observe
this when these spiders were alive, but I remember that the caput of
one of these spiders which had been injured in capture contracted and
expanded spasmodically, presenting a painful resemblance to laboured
breathing. I have not observed this in other spiders.]

During last May (1874) we spent a few days at Bordeaux on our
homeward route. While there my sister was fortunate enough to
discover a single nest of this type when we were out together on a
spider-hunt near the little village of Lormont, which is situated on
the opposite bank of the river to that on which the city stands. We
subsequently found these nests in tolerable abundance in a deep shady
lane near a restaurant called Mon Répos, on the same side of the
river, but rather farther up.

Here the hedge banks were high, and the soil was composed of a fine
even-grained loam of great depth, which permitted the spiders to
carry their tubes very far down, some of them attaining a length of
15 inches.

This made it very difficult to follow them throughout their whole
course and so to assure oneself of the real structure of the nests,
but I succeeded in doing this in twelve instances.

In every one of these I found the tube cylindrical and unbranched
throughout, and destitute of any trace of a lower door.

This deficiency alone distinguishes the present type from that to
which the nest of _Nemesia Eleanora_ belongs; the latter being of the
_double-door_ and the former of the _single-door, unbranched wafer
type_.

But perhaps it may be asked whether it is safe to assume that because
twelve examples of this nest were found to correspond in structure,
and were tenanted by the same occupant, that therefore all the
Bordeaux nests in which this particular spider might be found would
present similar peculiarities.

I greatly hope that other naturalists will put this question to the
test of actual investigation on the spot, but I do not hesitate to
assert my conviction that this will prove to be the case.

The result of my experience among the nests of the other _Nemesias_,
scores of which I have carefully examined in many widely separated
localities, shows that a given spider is invariably associated with
a fixed type of nest.

Thus, Cannes is from fifty to sixty miles distant from San Remo, but
the nests of _N. cæmentaria_, _N. Manderstjernæ_, and _N. Eleanora_
show precisely the same characteristics in either place.

Moreover, the twelve nests referred to were not all taken from one
restricted locality at Bordeaux, but were found presenting the same
characteristics and occupied by the same spider in three distinct
habitats, distant some miles from one another. In two nests several
young spiders were found with the mother, and, in one case where the
family consisted of twenty-three young ones, I observed that they
were not all equally small, and some had nearly attained one-third of
their full size.

This agreed with the fact that no very small nests were observed, and
it seems probable that the young are not turned out of their nursery
quite so early as some of their relations are at Mentone. This,
however, varies perhaps in accordance with changes of climate and
local conditions.

We failed to detect any other type of nest at Bordeaux than the one
described above: and even the cork nests, which we had shortly before
seen in such abundance at Montpellier, were apparently absent.

Bordeaux is by far the north-westernmost point in Europe[32] at
which any spider constructing a true trap-door nest has as yet been
discovered; and the fact that they exist in a climate so different
from that of the Riviera and of the whole Mediterranean region,
leads me to hope that their range may in reality be much more widely
extended than has hitherto been supposed to be the case.

[Footnote 32: Cork nests have however been mentioned as occurring in
the neighbourhood of Lyons, which lies in nearly the same parallel of
latitude with Bordeaux.]

A glance at the vegetation of this district will suffice to show how
little there is that betokens either a warm or dry winter climate;
for here the myrtles, oranges and olives are left far behind, and in
their place we see tall hedgerow elms, and poplars bearing mistletoe
on their branches.

Here therefore we are met by the question, How do these Bordeaux
spiders contrive to live under conditions so different from those to
which their relations on the Riviera have adapted themselves? How do
they bear the cold and damp of the long winter, and how is it that
one frail upper door suffices to protect their nest from molestation?

The thick coating of dead leaves, which covered the banks even when
we found them, no doubt aids largely in their concealment, and the
colder climate probably diminishes the number of their enemies, but
their means of subsistence are most likely also less abundant and
their period of active life shorter.

The next type we have to consider is a totally new one, and may be
distinguished as the _single-door branched wafer nest_. I detected
this nest at Montpellier but a few days before the visit to Bordeaux
alluded to above.

Circumstances unfortunately prevented me from following up my
discovery as closely as I could have wished, and it appears moreover
that this nest is far less common at Montpellier than the typical
cork nest (_Nemesia cæmentaria_).

[Illustration: _Plate XVII._]

I hope therefore that other naturalists will make further
investigations, and especially that they will endeavour to secure the
male.

I obtained twelve spiders and thoroughly followed the course of
ten nests; I opened thirteen more nests, but failed to trace their
structure satisfactorily.

The upper part of this nest is shown of the natural size in Plate
XVII. with the spider (_Nemesia suffusa_, Camb.[33]) which constructs
it. This is again a wafer nest without any lower door, and this
absence of a lower door alone distinguishes it as a type from the
branched nest represented at F in the diagram, just as the same
deficiency separated the Bordeaux type from that at fig. E.

[Footnote 33: We have again in this instance an exemplification of
the rule that a new type of nest indicates the presence of a new
spider, and hitherto, this rule has proved without exception. Mr.
Pickard-Cambridge's description of _N. suffusa_ will be found at
p. 295, below. Its slender proportions, cylindrico-ovate abdomen,
marked with narrow linear chevrons, and caput without, or almost
without, any median line or marking, form some of its more striking
characteristics.]

In this new single-door branched type, the branch makes a more or
less acute angle with the main tube, and reaches the surface of the
ground, but is there closed by a layer of particles of earth slightly
bound together with silk, forming an immovable cover or thatch. This
cover constitutes, however, but a slight obstruction and could easily
be torn away by the spider if she needed to use this passage as a way
of escape.

These nests were tolerably plentiful at a place called Les Mourines,
a short distance from Montpellier, where they were mixed with cork
nests in the steep hedge banks. The nests were from 8 to 10 inches
deep, and, as in all the trap-door nests which I have examined, were
tenanted by the female alone. It seems strange that this spider,
building as she does a nest apparently but poorly furnished either
for concealment or defence, should be able to enter into competition
with _N. cæmentaria_, whose solid, closely-fitting door appears so
perfectly contrived for both. It will probably be found, however,
when we are better acquainted with their respective ways of life,
that they are really more nearly on a footing than they seem to be
at first sight. I detected the remains of ants and the elytra of a
beetle in one of these branched single-door nests. Now these may also
be found in cork nests, so that _Nemesia suffusa_ evidently competes
with _cæmentaria_ for its food, and this is of course the main cause
of contention between all living creatures.

It is possible, that, if we knew all the uses to which the branch
is put by the spider which constructs it, we should find that the
advantages derived in the way of security from the existence of this
second passage, counterbalance those possessed by the cork nest,
which, though so perfectly closed, has only the one tube, and no
other possible way of escape.

It may perhaps be no more than a coincidence, but we can scarcely
avoid commenting upon the fact, that, just as this Montpellier wafer
nest is simpler in construction than any found along the Riviera, so
in like manner is the Bordeaux nest simpler than that of Montpellier.
It thus becomes tempting to ask whether, in the case of these wafer
nests, we shall not discover that the colder and damper climates are
the homes of the builders of the simpler types, while the warmer and
drier ones, where more food, more enemies and more competitors are
found, are reserved for the architects of the more complicated nests.

Doubtless naturalists will soon discover wafer nests on the slopes
of the Pyrenees, as for example at Pau and other winter stations in
South-western France; and perhaps the coast of the Bay of Biscay may
also yield specimens, even to the north of Bordeaux. If so, this
curious speculation as to whether there is any relation between
simplicity of structure and warmth of climate, will be put on its
trial.

About the very time when I was engaged in digging out these new wafer
nests at Montpellier, the celebrated arachnologist, Dr. L. Koch of
Nuremberg, had just published[34] an account and figure of a very
remarkable nest which he had received from Australia, and which,
though differing both in form and proportions from the Montpellier
nest, may nevertheless perhaps be referred to the present single-door
branched wafer type.

[Footnote 34: Dr. L. Koch, _Arachniden Australiens_, 10te. Lieferuug,
Nurnberg, 1874, tab. xxxvii. fig. 3, p. 484.]

This Australian nest, the exact habitat of which is not mentioned, is
constructed by a spider now described for the first time under the
name of _Idioctis helva_. The nest has a wafer-door about the size
of a sixpence, closing a vertical tube less than half an inch long,
which meets and opens into a horizontal tube about three inches in
length, and forms with it what may be roughly likened to the figure
of a capital T inverted, thus, ┹.

The upstroke of the T is however, very short, and one of the arms is
longer than the other, and curved downwards at its extremity. This
is, as far as I know, the first recorded example of a wafer-nest from
the Antipodes, and it may be regarded as one of the first fruits of
a harvest which lies ready for the reaping of any naturalist resident
in those parts. Hitherto the only nests which I have seen or heard of
from Australia were of the cork type (_Ants and Spiders_, p. 132).

Next in order to the single-door branched wafer comes the
_double-door unbranched wafer_ type, which is the simplest of all
the nests possessing two doors. This habitation, the work of _N.
Eleanora_, has been already described (_Ants and Spiders_, p. 106),
and I have not much to add to the account there given.

Perhaps some of my readers may remember that, while I was actually
engaged on the proofs of _Ants and Spiders_ I had one of these
_Eleanora_ spiders in captivity, and that I gave an account (p. 148)
of her behaviour up to the latest moment possible. She had been
captured on October 23, 1872, and placed, together with five young
ones found with her in the nest, on the surface of some earth in
a medium-sized flower-pot covered over with gauze. The young ones
soon made nests for themselves in the earth, each furnished with its
little door, but the mother roamed about on the surface of the soil,
and it was not until she had been twenty-one days in captivity that
she commenced spinning a silk cell.

This cell in twelve days' time presented the form of a rude figure
of 8, and had an aperture at either end; it was just large enough to
contain the spider when the legs were extended; its upper surface
was attached to the gauze covering of the pot, and its lower to the
earth. It was at this stage that the record was broken off, and I
will now relate the remainder of the history.

Four days before the cell was commenced, the spider had covered
the under surface of the gauze with a semi-transparent film of a
substance resembling varnish, which formed a band about three inches
long by half an inch wide, close to where the rim of the flower-pot
threw the most shade. It was at one extremity of this band that the
silk-cell was formed, but it is important to note that this band of
varnish was longer than the cell, which only measured an inch and a
quarter from end to end, for we shall see that the layer of varnish
was apparently laid with a view to further operations.

In four days after the completion of the cell its form was modified,
and, during the next ten days (up to December 21st), the spider
gradually thickened the walls, and made the form of the cell more and
more cylindrical, sometimes closing and at other times opening the
extremities.

Between December 14th and 25th, she lengthened out the cell by
spinning a cylindrical silk tube in prolongation of one end, and this
tube followed the course of the band of varnish, the whole measuring
three-and-a-half inches in length by about half an inch in diameter.

It would appear therefore from the correspondence in length between
the band of varnish and this silk tube, that she had contemplated
the construction of the latter when she first commenced her work on
November 3rd.

On January 19th the silk tube parted from the gauze, leaving only
the enlarged end which formed the cell still adhering to it. On the
following day I observed the very curious fact that when I sprinkled
the nest with water, as it was my custom to do every morning, the
tube, which had become somewhat flaccid since it had lost its
attachment to the gauze, gradually recovered its perfect shape. This
was repeated for eleven days, until on the morning of the twelfth
day (January 31st), finding the tube completely collapsed, instead
of merely sprinkling water over it, I drew a large camel-hair brush
loaded with water along its whole length, when the tube started up,
and almost instantaneously regained its cylindrical form.

This morning the spider had left her cell, and was roaming about
the pot when I wetted the tube, thus proving that she was in no way
concerned with its movements, which were no doubt due to hygrometric
action.

Between this time and February 25th, I constantly restored the tube
to its shape by wetting it in the way above described, but on this
day it remained very flaccid, and only expanded partially. For some
days previous to this date, the spider had left the tube when it
collapsed, and only returned to it again when it had resumed its
shape. On the following day I found the entire silk tube and the cell
again collapsed and lying flat upon the ground, and this time water
failed to produce its previous effect.

The spider then became very restless and excited, and I observed
that the door of one of the little nests constructed by one of her
five offspring which had been imprisoned in the same pot with her,
had been torn off, and thrown on one side, and there could be little
doubt but that the mother had been guilty of this very un-maternal
action. By the evening she had pulled up her collapsed tube from
its attachment to the earth, and had coiled it in a confused heap.
Seeing this, and fearing that, in her distress and excitement, she
might do further damage to the young spiders, which had up to that
time thriven well, I made a cylindrical hole for her in the earth,
supposing that she would at once take possession of it. On the
following morning, however, the mother spider had advanced some way
in building another figure-of-8 cell, rising the shrivelled silk of
her previous dwelling as a foundation.

In twenty-four hours this second cell was complete, and closely
resembled the former one, save that the smaller end of the 8 was
turned in the opposite direction, but, on examining it, I found to my
surprise that it was empty! The spider had taken possession of the
hole I had made for her, which she had at first refused to notice,
and was busily employed in lining it with silk and furnishing it with
a covering composed of silk with earth and fragments of moss woven
into the surface. By mid-day the aperture was completely closed, but
there was no moveable door. From this time (February 28) up to April
12, the spider lived in this hole, which she eventually furnished
with a distinct wafer-door, and, as I found on opening the nest, with
a typical lower door also. This latter was not neatly made, but still
it possessed all features the essential which characterize these
lower doors in the nests of _N. Eleanora_.

So this captive _Nemesia Eleanora_ lived in a flower-pot in my
bedroom for more than five months and a half, during which time she
absolutely refused to burrow or to attempt any kind of excavation,
but passed the greater part of that period on the surface of the
earth in a silk tube ending in an oblong enlargement, utterly unlike
her normal habitation. Finally, when I had done the digging for her,
she furnished the cylindrical hole I had bored in the earth with a
silk lining, and made it secure with her own two typical doors.

The figure-of-8 cell which she constructed at first, and subsequently
modified until it became the oblong enlargement of the tube alluded
to above, was totally unlike any form of trap-door spider's nest
known to me; but in its ultimate shape (which resembled that of the
glass part of a thermometer with an oblong bulb, save that it was
curved and not straight), I think we may trace some resemblance
to the silk tube which is made by _Atypus_, and of which a figure
is given at A, Plate XIII., p. 183; the mouth of the tube made
by my captive was, however, open. It is curious, also, when we
recall this resemblance, to note that Mr. Brown has recorded, in
his observations alluded to above (p. 185), that the tube of one
of the nests of _Atypus_, which he brought home in a collapsed
state, showed a somewhat similar tendency to become distended. For,
on opening the box in which they had been carried, he perceived a
movement throughout the tube as if it were becoming inflated, and
though this inflation appeared to subside shortly after, yet the
following morning the tube had recovered its cylindrical shape. I
am tempted to believe, though this is mere conjecture, that the box
in which these tubes were put contained moisture, and that their
apparent inflation was due to the same hygrometric action which, was
displayed in the tube of _N. Eleanora_. I regretted that I was unable
to continue my observations on this captive spider, as it would have
been interesting to know how long she would have lived contentedly
and in good health under the conditions described above, but I left
Mentone at the end of April, and was unable to take her alive with me
to England. When removed from her nest in the pot on April 12, she
appeared in perfect condition, and I placed her in a hole which I
made for her among some stones in a garden at the back of the house,
hoping to find her again on my return to Mentone in the autumn; this
hope was, however, not destined to be realized.

I shall, however, have occasion to speak again of the young captives
of this species (_N. Eleanora_), in the concluding remarks which will
follow these detailed accounts of the nests and their occupants, when
the behaviour of captive trap-door spiders generally will be treated
of.

The next type of trap-door nest is one to which I have found it
difficult to assign a descriptive name, and I am compelled for the
present to speak of it as the _Hyères double-door branched wafer_
nest.

One of its most distinctive features is found in the shape of the
lower door, fig. F 1, Plate XIV., and figs. A 1, A 2, Plate XVIII.,
which may be said to be double, presenting two crowns, one of which
fits into the main tube and the other into the branch, but I could
not see my way to employing this character in naming the type.
The nest is, however, quite distinct from all the others, and is
inhabited by a new species of trap-door spider (_N. congener_,
Camb.[35]). The characteristic portions of this nest are shown
in Plate XVIII., and fig. A 3, in the same Plate, represents its
occupant.

[Footnote 35: Mr. Pickard-Cambridge's description will be found at
p. 292, below. In its characters this female spider (the male is
unknown) most nearly resembles _N. cæmentaria_, but differs, among
other points, in markings and in having one or more spines on the
genual joint of leg, these spines being almost always absent in the
same joint in _cæmentaria_. The nests of the two species are totally
unlike.]

The hedge-banks near Hyères, and also about the railway station
of the same name, which is some 4 miles from the town itself, are
frequently tenanted by this spider. During a short stay there in
May, 1873, I secured a large number of specimens, and verified the
structure of the nest by a careful examination of thirty-eight
examples. The nest is invariably branched and furnished with a lower
door, but the branch is of variable length, usually short, and never,
as far as I could detect, quite reaches the surface. In some cases
this branch was so short that it could scarcely contain the spider,
and, under these circumstances, it is not easy to conceive any other
use for it than that of retaining the lower door when not in use. It
may, however, enable the spider to take up a rather better position
when engaged, as she frequently is if disturbed, in keeping the main
tube closed by pressing the lower door upwards with her feet, for
then her head points downwards, and her abdomen rests in the branch.

[Illustration: _Plate XVIII._]

I have seen her in this attitude on several occasions when I had cut
out a block of earth similar to that figured in the plate. The lower
door is quite unlike that of either of the other two double-door
wafer nests, being wedge-shaped, tapering from below upwards to
the hinge, which is always placed at the point of bifurcation of
the tubes, and having two crowns separated from each other by the
gusset-like web of silk which connects the door on either side with
the lining of the main tube, one of these crowns fitting into and
closing the main tube, while the other fits into the aperture of the
branch.

The wedge-shaped structure of the door is seen in its most
exaggerated form in the nests of the younger spiders (figs. B,
B 1, Plate XVIII.), and becomes less so in the older and larger
ones (figs. A 1, A 2). I have even seen some of these lower doors,
evidently made by old spiders, which were so much flattened as to
bear a considerable resemblance to that of _N. Eleanora_.

The main tube of the nest is from 10 to 12 inches long, and usually
enters the earth almost horizontally, bending downwards from the
point at which the branch joins it, and where the lower door is
hung. This causes the lower door to lie nearly horizontally when not
in use, and its lower crown probably serves, by fitting into the
aperture of the branch, to sustain it in this position and prevent it
from falling forward. The point of bifurcation is placed, as a rule,
much nearer to the entrance of the nest, than it is in the two other
branched nests, and occurs usually within two inches of the surface
of the earth; so close is it indeed that, on lifting the upper door
and looking in, one may frequently see the lower door move across
and close the passage down the main tube, pushed by the spider from
below. This frequently enabled me to secure the spider without having
to follow her to the bottom of the nest; and, when fortune favoured
me, I secured a block of earth by one rapid sweep of the knife (a
common table-knife), which furnished me at once with a good specimen
of the nest and of its occupant.

When the spider has once fairly determined upon resistance, it is
scarcely possible to make her retreat without destroying the nest,
and, in one case, when I tried to push the lower door down from
above, while she was pressing it upwards from below, I found that,
without crushing my opponent, I could not succeed.

There were probably young in the nest on this occasion, for I have
frequently found them in the nests with the mother at this season. In
no case did I even catch a glimpse of the male, and this sex is at
present unknown.

The young spiders make their nests at an early age, and there can
be no doubt that _N. congener_ enlarges its dwelling from time to
time as growth demands, just as the trap-door spiders at Mentone
do. Indeed in one of these new Hyères nests I found, outside the
main tube and some way above the existing lower door, a former
and disused lower door much smaller than the one then in use, and
which had evidently belonged to the nest at a previous stage of its
development. I have observed this before in the nests both of _N.
Manderstjernæ_ and _N. Eleanora_.

This new type is strictly intermediate between the double-door
unbranched wafer nest constructed by _N. Eleanora_, and the
double-door branched wafer with the descending cavity which I am now
about to describe.

This latter nest, the work of _N. Manderstjernæ_, Auss.[36]
(formerly called _N. meridionalis_), has already been partially
made known by the figures and description given of it in _Ants and
Spiders_ (Plates IX., X., and XI., pp. 98, 100, and 104); but I have
to confess, with great regret, that when these illustrations and
descriptions were published, I was not fully acquainted with the true
structure of this nest, having overlooked the existence of a short
descending cavity which leaves the main tube a little above and on
the opposite side to the ascending branch. This cavity is always
present, but the very largest and oldest spiders usually allow it to
become filled up with remains of food and particles of earth, and
sometimes even spin silk across its entrance, in which case it can
only be traced on very close examination.

[Footnote 36: This spider was described by Mr. Pickard-Cambridge at
p. 101 in _Ants and Spiders_, under the name of _N. meridionalis_,
Costa. This name has now to be abandoned for reasons given in full
by Mr. Cambridge at p. 283, below. It would appear that a spider
discovered by M. Simon in Corsica corresponds more closely with the
_N. meridionalis_ of Costa than our spider of the Riviera does.
Moreover, since _Ants and Spiders_ was written I have had the good
fortune to obtain at Mentone four male examples of our supposed
_meridionalis_, and these prove to possess the same characters as
those assigned by Prof. Ausserer to a male spider which was captured
at Nice, and named by him _N. Manderstjernæ_. This specimen is now
in the possession of Dr. L. Koch, to whom I am much indebted for
having kindly entrusted it to me for examination. This enabled Mr.
Pickard-Cambridge to assure himself of the specific identity of his
_N. meridionalis_ with _N. Manderstjernæ_, which latter name it must
for the future bear.]

It was from an old nest such as this, in which the descending cavity
had been closed up, that the large drawing at fig. A on Plate IX.
of _Ants and Spiders_ was made, and this figure, therefore, still
remains substantially correct.

But in the case of the other illustrations--namely, fig. B, Plate
IX., fig. A, Plate X., and figs. B and B 1, Plate XI., where nests of
young spiders, or of spiders which, though adult, have not attained
the maximum size, are represented, this descending cavity, though
overlooked by me, should have been shown, for it must certainly have
existed.

Its presence was first observed by the Honourable L. G. Dillon, who
detected it when tracing the course of the main tube upwards from
below. I had always followed the tube from above downwards, and in
so doing must have unwittingly filled up the descending cavity (the
existence of which I was far from suspecting) with detached particles
of earth.

I will own that, when Mr. Dillon first showed me this new feature, I
hoped that it might prove to be something accidental and exceptional;
and it was only after careful examination of a large series of nests
of all sizes, that I gradually and almost unwillingly admitted that
this descending cavity formed an important feature in the typical
structure of the nests.

I now see, however, that the presence of this cavity adds
considerably to the interest of the structure as a whole, and places
its architect quite at the head of all the builders of trap-door
nests. This type should now be called, for the sake of distinction,
the _double-door, branched, cavity, wafer_ nest, to avoid confusion
with the _Hyères branched nest_.

I am now about to endeavour to atone for my past oversight by giving
new illustrations (Plate XIX., figs. A and B) and descriptions of
this very remarkable nest; while I would at the same time beg the
indulgence of my readers for past and present shortcomings, reminding
them that the interest which attaches to structures of this kind is
proportioned to the complexity and subtlety of their contrivance,
and, therefore, to the difficulty we experience in properly
understanding and describing them.

[Illustration: _Plate XIX._]

It will be seen by a reference to Plate XIX.,[37] figs. A and A 1,
that in addition to the cylindrical branch, which mounts upwards,
there is a shorter branch which leaves the main tube on the opposite
side (on the left as seen in the Plate), and takes a downward course.
Now this descending branch, which is barely more than an inch in
length, is a cavity of variable form, being sometimes cylindrical,
and sometimes egg- or even watch-shaped,[38] but there is one
particular in which it never varies, and that is the position of its
elliptic orifice. This orifice is always situated on the opposite
side of the main tube to that on which the ascending branch leaves
this latter, so that the whole nest, when seen in section, presents
the figure of a St. Andrew's cross, only with arms of unequal length.

[Footnote 37: A nest of a scarcely half-grown spider is here
represented in order that sufficient space might be gained to show
the lower door in its two positions. The perfect cavity is still
found in nests of much larger dimensions, and occasionally, indeed,
in nests of almost the maximum size.]

[Footnote 38: I take the liberty of coining a word to replace
"lenticular," the form of a watch being more familiar than that of a
lens.]

But the most remarkable point is that, when the lower door is pushed
across so as to close the main tube (as shown in fig. A, Plate XIX.),
it will invariably be found to lie in such a position that its
lower extremity exactly meets the lower lip of the orifice of the
descending cavity, when it will be seen that the semi-cylindrical
surface of the lower door then coincides with, and appears to
continue and form part of, the lower wall of the descending cavity
on the one side, and of the corresponding wall of the main tube on
the other. When the upper portion of the main tube is thus united
to the cavity the two combine to form what appears like a short,
independent unbranched nest.

Now, if we fancy ourselves an insect entering the nest in search
either of the spider, her eggs, or young, I think it is plain that,
when the lower door is in this position (fig. A), we should probably
walk straight down to the bottom of the cavity, expecting to find our
prey there, and should then return by the way we came, impressed with
the belief that we had explored the whole nest, the secret of the
lower door remaining undiscovered.

Whether this imaginary case may, or may not, represent what really
takes place, is of course mere conjecture; but the constant
occurrence of this beautiful adaptation of the various parts to
one another, surely points to the conclusion that this is no mere
coincidence, but rather a subtle contrivance having some very
definite use and meaning.

We must admit, however, that it is difficult to conceive why, if this
structure is of such great utility, it should be abandoned by the
oldest and largest spiders.

Among the possible answers to this question I think that one of
the more probable is that this arrangement may have been specially
devised for protection against some enemy which the aged spiders have
ceased to fear.

Indeed it is not unlikely that these aged spiders may have come to a
time of life when they no longer lay eggs, and so do not need to keep
up all the defences which they employed when they had families to
protect.

Since my attention was drawn to the existence of this cavity in the
dwellings of _N. Manderstjernæ_ I have never noted the presence of
young in those nests in which the cavity was filled up and disused;
but then I have only exact records with reference to this point in
the case of seven nests.

In these seven nests, however, there was no free cavity, and there
were no young spiders, though it was at the season when it was common
to find young in the nests.

The question, therefore, remains open, and further observations
on this head would be very acceptable. I detected the _débris_ of
insects, and especially the horny coats of ants, in the descending
cavity, in many nests; and in some of the oldest, where it had become
completely blocked up, these remains still indicated its former
outlines and position.

The nests of _N. Manderstjernæ_ at Cannes correspond both in respect
of the cavity and of their other characteristics with those at
Mentone. _N. Manderstjernæ_ occurs pretty abundantly at San Remo in
the olive-grounds east of the Sanctuary, but I can say nothing as
to whether the nests there possessed the cavity or not, for, when
I was there, I was not aware of its existence. I obtained a single
example of _N. Manderstjernæ_ and its nest at Hyères, and this is the
westernmost point at which this species has as yet been detected.

We have now passed in review all the seven known types of true
trap-door nest, and have taken note also of the lower and more
rudimentary forms of nest, such as that of _Atypus_, and the funnel
nest of _Cyrtauchenius elongatus_, neither of which is furnished with
a door.

Among the true trap-door nests, those of the cork type stand in a
measure alone, being distinguished from all the others by their solid
surface doors, composed of many layers of silk and earth; and we do
not at present know of any intermediate forms linking the cork and
wafer types together. But among the various nests which represent the
wafer type the case is different, for here the types naturally fall
into a progressive series, such as that represented in the diagrams
(Pl. XIV., p. 193).

If we try to picture to ourselves the stages through which the most
complicated wafer nest--namely, that of the _double-door, branched,
cavity_ type (Diagram G 1) may have passed in the course of its
development from a simpler ancestral form, we should _à priori_
expect to find precisely such structures as the _Hyères double-door
branched_ nest (Diagram F), and the _single-door branched_ nest
(Diagram D) forming successive halting-places in the advance from the
primitive _single-door, unbranched_ nest (Diagram C).

The _double-door unbranched_ type may in like manner find its
prototype in the same original single-door unbranched nest (C), which
we may look upon as the parent idea, from which all these structures
have been derived.

Bearing this in mind, and remembering that kinship between living
creatures is not only revealed to us by likeness in structure and
colour, but also by similarity in habits and instincts, it becomes
of interest to trace any resemblance that may exist between these
wafer-nests and the dwellings constructed by _Lycosa narbonensis_,
a species belonging to the allied family of _Lycosidæ_, and which
closely resembles the true _tarantula_[39] of Southern Italy.

[Footnote 39: In the United States, and indeed in the New World
generally, it seems to be the custom to call all the larger "ground
spiders," and especially the trap-door spiders, Tarantulas, but
these, in fact, form a distinct group by themselves, belonging to the
family _Lycosidæ_.]

I first made the acquaintance of _Lycosa narbonensis_ near the
glass-works west of Cannes, where this spider may not rarely be found
living in tubular burrows in sandy clearings among the pine woods
along the shore (_Pinus pinea_, the stone pine).

I have already (_Ants and Spiders_, p. 146), alluded to an account
given by M. Léon Dufour of his observations on the nest and habits of
the true tarantula (_Lycosa tarentula_), which he discovered in Spain.

The nests of _L. narbonensis_ at Cannes resembled those described by
M. Dufour, but the cylindrical, subterranean burrows were apparently
shorter. It was extremely difficult to trace their course, on account
of the loose sand which poured into the tubes and choked them up, and
I only succeeded in doing so completely in one case, when I stuffed
the tube with cotton-wool before proceeding to dig. Here the open
tube, which was quite simple, and about 1 inch in diameter, descended
vertically for 3-1/4 inches, and was then suddenly bent so as to
become horizontal, terminating shortly afterwards in a triangular
chamber, the floor of which measured 2 inches across at the widest
part, and was strewed with the remains of beetles and other insects.

The nest was lined throughout with coarse silk, which had a blackish
hue, owing to the presence of the filaments of what I believe to have
been some undeveloped fungoid growth. The mouth of the tube was open,
and frequently surmounted by a short tubular prolongation, commencing
at the surface of the ground, which formed a sort of chimney about an
inch high and from an inch to an inch and a quarter across; this was
composed of fibres of plants, pine-needles, and especially of a large
branching lichen, very common in the neighbourhood of the nests, and
all these materials were woven together and kept in place by a few
threads of silk spun here and there.

It was not every nest that was furnished with a chimney, nor were
all the chimneys equally complete, for in some cases they consisted
merely of a small rim or one-sided lip, while in others they
resembled little birds' nests, and were sufficiently firm and compact
to permit of my carrying them away. It appeared to me that these
chimneys served as screens to prevent the loose sand from being swept
into the burrows by the winds which rage over that open seashore
plain, and that they were more or less complete in proportion as
the exposure was greater or less, and the sand looser or more bound
together.

I captured eight of these spiders, and here, as in the trap-door
group, the female alone inhabited the nest.

Besides this habit, they have other points in common with trap-door
spiders; such, for example, as the resemblance which exists between
this nest and that of _Theraphosa Blondii_ from Brazil (see p. 188,
above), and between the chimney of this Tarantula and the aërial
prolongation of the tube sometimes found in nests of the wafer type.

But perhaps the most suggestive point of resemblance consists in
the habit which this Tarantula possesses of covering and closing
the aperture of the nest during the winter with a thin layer of
materials, similar to those of which the chimney is composed,
and, like them, bound together with silk. This is, in fact, an
immovable wafer-door, and precisely resembles those which I have
seen constructed by _Nemesia Manderstjernæ_, and _N. Eleanora_, when
captive and placed in an artificial hole in the earth.

The tubes are, as has been already stated, open during the spring,
and we may suppose that the spider, on the approach of warm weather,
wakes up from her winter lethargy, and tears away this concealing
thatch. But if one of these spiders should by chance happen to free
this silk-woven thatch by cutting round some three-fourths of its
circumference, so as to leave it still attached to the rim of the
aperture of the nest by the remaining quarter, she would then have
made for herself a veritable, though rather rude trap-door of the
wafer kind.

It is most likely, however, that the spider knows what she is about
and that a door to her dwelling would be the reverse of an advantage
to her, for she is more powerful and swifter than the generality of
European trap-door spiders, and, as she probably lives by leaping out
upon and hunting her prey, she no doubt needs to have the entrance to
her nest free of all encumbrance.

I am indebted to the Rev. W. G. Brackenridge for evidence of the very
interesting fact that _Lycosa narbonensis_ closes her nest at Cannes
in the winter.

I was aware that Latreille stated that the Tarantula possessed this
habit,[40] and I was anxious to know whether the species which I had
detected at Cannes, inhabiting as it did open nests in the month of
May, would also exhibit this curious custom. Being unable to visit
Cannes myself during the winter, I applied to Mr. Brackenridge,
who, on the 28th of January last (1874), secured a very perfect
specimen of the aërial portion or chimney of one of the nests having
the orifice closed in the way above described, and most kindly
transmitted it to me.

[Footnote 40: P. A. Latreille, Mem. Soc. Hist. Nat., Paris (an. VII.
de la République), p. 124: "L'araignée _tarentule_ ferme aussi son
habitation, mais cet opercule n'est pas mobile, et n'est construit
que pour l'hiver."]

I have, on a very few occasions, found the doors of a wafer or cork
nest spun up during the winter at Mentone, and on digging have
discovered the spider alive, though partially torpid, inside; but
this is quite an exceptional event. I should much like to know,
however, whether this becomes the rule in the case of the nests of
those trap-door spiders which inhabit climates less favoured than
that of Mentone.

In my concluding remarks in _Ants and Spiders_ I called attention to
the importance which attaches to a knowledge of the food and manner
of feeding of any creature whose life-history we may wish to study,
and I would now once more press the subject on the attention of my
readers. For the range and distribution of a species largely depends
upon the nature of its food, and this will also be an indication
of the rivals with which it has to compete in the struggle for
existence; the times and seasons of its activity, and in many cases
even the structure and position of its dwelling-place will be
governed by this same all-important question of food-supply.

I have now detected the remains of insects, and of ants especially,
in the nest of every species of trap-door spider which I have
examined _in situ_; very frequently, however, one may open several
nests in succession without finding any of these _débris_, and at
other times they will only be detected beneath the existing bottom of
the tube, layers of silk having been spun over successive layers of
refuse.

The horny coats of ants form by very far the largest proportion of
these remains, and I have lately been much struck by the number of
instances in which, while digging out ants' nests at Mentone, I
have found trap-door nests (especially those of _N. Manderstjernæ_
and _N. Moggridgii_) in their midst, the tubes often traversing the
very heart of the ants' colony and coming into close contact with
the galleries and chambers of the ants. The doors in these instances
had almost always escaped my notice, and, indeed, they so closely
resembled the surface of the ground that even when I knew, from
having accidentally cut across the tube below ground, that one of
these doors must lie near a given spot, yet I could only discover it
by following the passage from below upwards. This perfect concealment
is doubtless of essential importance to the spiders' success in life,
for, if they once alarmed the whole colony of ants and let them know
the exact whereabouts of their lurking-place, they would soon learn
to avoid it.

But, as it is, the work of opening the door, snatching in an ant, and
closing it again, is but the affair of a second or two, and before
the companions of the victim have time to realize the nature of the
phenomenon, the gaping earth has closed again and become once more,
to all appearance, part of the solid and trustworthy ground.

I have seen _N. Manderstjernæ_ snatch at insects in this way during
the daytime, and I well remember how I started on one occasion when,
as I was looking fixedly at a small blue gnat which I had taken for a
moth, I saw the earth suddenly open and one of these spiders partly
emerge, make a swift stroke at the insect, and withdraw again as
swiftly.

I have found the remains of ants, of beetles of many species
and different sizes, of wood-lice (_Oniscus_), and of earwigs
(_Forficula_) in the nests of _N. Eleanora_ and _N. Manderstjernæ_,
and the wings of a large green field-bug in the nest of the former.
I have only once detected traces of food in the dwellings of
_Cteniza Moggridgii_, and these consisted of minute fragments of the
integuments of insects, none of which were certainly recognisable,
though I believe that they partly consisted of the coats of a small
species of ant. The rarity or complete absence of the wings of
insects which habitually fly rather than crawl on the ground, and
my inability to discover either snares or any evidence that these
spiders ever leave the nest, lead me to believe that they live (at
any rate from October to May) by dragging into their nests any
insects which approach within reach.

Ants, earwigs, beetles, and wood-lice are precisely the very
creatures which would fall a prey to the spider without obliging her
to leave her nest, and it is accordingly their remains that we find.

On one occasion, however, at Montpellier, my sister detected _N.
cæmentaria_ in the act of devouring a fair-sized caterpillar, to
obtain which there is some reason to think she must have left her
nest. We were out together on the 8th of May last (1874), hunting for
the new wafer nests of that district, under the kind guidance of M.
Lichtenstein, when my sister called our attention to a caterpillar,
the body of which partly projected from the tube of a cork nest (_N.
cæmentaria_), and prevented the lid from closing.

On closer examination we found that the spider was in the act of
devouring the caterpillar, and had already sucked out the juices from
the anterior portion, while the middle and posterior parts of the
body still resisted, and the legs clung tenaciously to the lip of the
nest.

M. Lichtenstein told us that this larva, which when entire must have
been rather more than an inch long, was that of the mullein moth
(_Cucullia verbasci_).

It was not full grown, and as there were no mullein plants within
some two feet of the nest and this caterpillar will not leave the
plant on which it feeds unless compelled, it would seem as if the
spider must have gone afield in order to capture it. It is possible,
nevertheless, that the caterpillar may have fallen within reach of
the spider when blown off the mullein leaves by the wind.

I have, unfortunately, but few details to give of the nocturnal
habits of the trap-door spiders. It would appear, however, that they
are more active by night than by day, and that it is more common
to find their doors ajar at night, with the spiders posted on the
look-out at the narrow opening. This is borne out by my observations
on captive spiders, to which I shall allude shortly.

When at Hyères on the 11th of May, 1873, the evening being very
warm and a bright moon shining, I went at 8:30 P.M. with my father
and sister to see what the spiders would be doing on a hedge bank
where we had previously marked five cork and eight wafer nests. The
moonlight did not fall upon this spot, but I was provided with a
lantern, and by its light the nests at first appeared to be tightly
closed, but we soon perceived first one and then another with the
door slightly raised, ready to close on the smallest alarm, whether
from a footfall or from the flickering of the lamp. When the light of
the lantern was steady it did not appear to frighten the spiders in
the least, even when brought to within a few inches of the door,[41]
and this enabled me to watch them very closely. On either side of
the raised door of one of the wafer nests I could see the feet of
the spider projecting, and just at that moment I caught sight of a
beetle close at hand, feeding on the topmost spray of some small
plant below. Using every precaution, I contrived to gather the spray
without shaking off the beetle, and gradually pushed it nearer and
nearer to the nest. When it almost touched the lip of the nest the
door flew open, and the spider snatched at the beetle and dragged it
down below.

[Footnote 41: This had been observed before both by my father and Mr.
Dillon when watching the trap-door spiders at night at Mentone.]

For a few seconds the door remained tightly closed, and then, to our
great surprise, was suddenly opened again, and the beetle was cast
alive and unharmed out of the nest. I immediately secured the insect,
which proved to be the common _Chrysomela Banksii_.[42]

[Footnote 42: I am indebted to Mr. F. Smith for the name.]

I cannot doubt that this beetle was distasteful in some way to the
spider, for it was neither so large nor so powerful as many beetles
the remains of which I have found in the spiders' nests, and,
besides, it did not escape from the nest, but was distinctly rejected
by its captor.

This shows that this spider does not know instinctively what insects
to reject and what to take.

This little episode was scarcely ended when I espied a wood-louse
(_Oniscus_) walking down the bank, not far from another of these
wafer nests. By a little guidance I managed so to turn its course
that this unsuspicious crustacean went straight to the very point I
wished, and made as if it would walk over the spider's door; but no
sooner was it well within reach than, quick as thought, the spider
clutched it and dragged it in. No rejection followed on this capture,
and, though I could not actually witness the conclusion of this
adventure, I do not doubt that it ended in a tragedy and a supper.

In these two cases, as in all those previously noted, the spiders did
not leave the nest nor allow the door to close behind them, but kept
it propped up on the abdomen and hindmost pair of legs. In this way
the act of seizing their prey, and that of withdrawing into the nest,
were almost simultaneous.

In no case did we see any of these spiders out of their nests, and
their behaviour by night appeared to be the same as by day, only that
they were bolder and more on the alert.

The spiders in the cork nests (_N. Moggridgii_) resisted our attempts
to raise their doors just as rigorously as in the daytime.

All the spiders which I have kept in captivity have shown themselves
more active at night than during the day, and I imagine that
experience has taught them that fewer of their enemies are then
abroad, while ants, beetles, wood-lice, and other creatures upon
which they prey are quite as nocturnal as themselves.

I brought back to England some young cork and wafer spiders from
Hyères, and one adult cork (_N. Moggridgii_). The latter was placed
in a small tin box, with moss and a little earth at the bottom, on
the evening of May the 10th, 1873, and by next morning she had made
a silk tube through the moss, carrying up earth from below for the
purpose of strengthening its walls on the outside. On the 13th of May
the tube was furnished with a perfect door.

I hoped that this spider might lay eggs in her prison,[43] and
therefore broke up her nest from time to time after my return to
London in order to search for them. Between the 27th of May (when her
nest had been transferred into a box of earth) and the 6th of October
I destroyed her dwelling four times, and after each demolition
she furnished the cylindrical hole which I bored for her with a
lid, having thus made five doors since her capture. I got no eggs
however, though the spider appeared in perfect health.

[Footnote 43: Strange to say, though I have opened so many nests
at different seasons of the year, and found young apparently quite
recently hatched, I have never been able to find the eggs of a
trap-door spider.]

Neither this spider nor the true _N. cæmentaria_ of Montpellier
appears to have any idea of digging a hole when placed on soft earth
if they are adult; and the same thing is true of _N. Manderstjernæ_
and _N. Eleanora_, but the young of all these spiders readily
excavate nests for themselves.

I have once seen a nearly full grown, and probably adult, _Cteniza
Moggridgii_ make a perfect tube and furnish it with a moveable door
in a single night when confined under gauze on moist earth, but this
is the only instance (except that of _Cteniza Californica_, recorded
above) in which I have known an adult trap-door spider excavate or
attempt to do so.

These _Ctenizas_ seem to be peculiarly able to adapt themselves
to circumstances, for two young ones, which I sent by post to M.
Lucas at the Jardin des Plantes in Paris in little wide-mouthed,
cylindrical, blue glass bottles, not only lined the bottles with silk
but also closed them at the mouth with a door fitting accurately
into a bevelled lip, in the manufacture of both of which fragments
of moss, the only material at their disposal, were used in place
of earth.[44] It is curious to see how quickly the young trap-door
spiders, both of the cork and wafer kinds, when taken from the
nest of the mother, will make their own perfect little dwellings
in captivity, and I have known them construct tube and door within
fifteen hours.

[Footnote 44: M. H. Lucas, in _Bull. des Séances de la Soc. Entom. de
Fr._ No. 27 (1874), p. 101.]

I have watched the proceedings of the young spiders, when taken from
the mother's nest, in the following species: _Nemesia Manderstjernæ_,
_N. Eleanora_, _N. congener_, and _N. Moggridgii_, the three first
constructing wafer, and the last a cork nest. All of these very young
spiders will excavate their own tubes and bring out pellets of the
earth, which closely resemble those carried out from their galleries
by the ants.

As has been stated before, the young brood, while still in the
mother's nest, will often comprise individuals of different
sizes, and though the majority are no larger than the baby-spider
represented at Fig. B 2, Pl. IX., _Ants and Spiders_, some may
occasionally be found that are fully twice as large.

The little nests which they make in captivity vary accordingly in
size. Thus, out of sixteen young taken from the mother's nest (_N.
Eleanora_), eleven, three days after capture, had made nests in the
earth of a flower-pot, and the wafer doors of six of these nests
measured 2 lines across, of four 2-1/2 lines, and of one 3 lines. The
first nests of another similar lot of young _Eleanora_ spiders had
wafer doors measuring respectively 2, 2-1/2, 2-1/2, 3 and 3 lines. In
another case when I captured fourteen young (the entire brood found
in the nest of the mother, _N. Manderstjernæ_), after the lapse of
five days every one of them had made a nest, but these were smaller
and more uniform, ten of the wafer doors measuring 2 lines across,
one 1-1/2, and one 2-1/2.

These little spiders need to be kept constantly supplied with flies,
which should be killed and placed near their nests; they are often
so greedy that they will attempt to drag a house-fly entire down
their tubes for which it is much too large, when the door is pushed
open, and the fly remains sticking in the entrance to the nest with
its legs up in the air. One may even feed these spiders oneself by
approaching carefully and, without causing any vibration, pushing the
fly, placed on the end of a pencil, within reach of the spider.

I have given my reasons before (_Ants and Spiders_, p. 127) for
believing that the trap-door spiders do not as a rule desert
their nests, but enlarge them from time to time to meet their own
requirements of growth; showing, by a comparison of the measurements
of the doors of eight nests in April with those of the same nests in
the following October, that all had increased in size.

Subsequent observations have confirmed this; I find that the young
spiders taken from the mother's nest enlarge their nests in captivity
in a precisely similar way.

Thus, for example, the wafer doors of three young _Eleanora_ spiders,
made within a few days after their removal from the mother's nest
on February 20th, 1873, and first measured on February 28th, had
increased between that date and Nov. 29th following from 2 to 4
lines, 2-1/2 to 4 lines, and 2-1/2 to 6 lines respectively.

It is unfortunate that the male and female spiders are
undistinguishable when very young, as it would be interesting to
know whether the males construct nests before they take to their
adult life, during which they roam from place to place and hide under
stones.

In one case fourteen young spiders, forming this entire family taken
with a female _N. Manderstjernæ_, made nests; so that unless all of
these were females, we have evidence here to prove that the males do
commence life by building nests for themselves.

I kept the male _Cteniza Moggridgii_, for ten days on damp earth in
captivity, but he made no attempt to excavate or spin, and wandered
restlessly about, scarcely touching the flies[45] with which I
supplied him.

[Footnote 45: I habitually fed my captive spiders with common
house-flies, and it was curious to see how entirely the latter were
wanting in any instinctive fear of even the largest spiders. They
would creep between the spiders' legs, causing them to start as
if electrified, and frequently it was not until the flies, after
repeating this annoyance several times, actually walked up to and
almost touched the fangs of the spider, that they were punished for
their ignorance and presumption.]

Seeing this I could not venture to prolong his captivity, as I feared
to risk injuring a specimen which was quite unique and which there
was little likelihood of my being able to replace. It is rather
curious that M. Simon should also have found one male, and one
only, of the closely-related _Ct. fodiens_ of Corsica, and that his
specimen should be, like mine, the only one known.

Bearing in mind the curious problems which arise as to the affinities
of the flora and fauna of the Alpes Maritimes with that of Corsica,
the fact that the species of _Cteniza_ which is found at Mentone,
though allied to, is yet distinct from the insular species, gains a
new interest.

We ask ourselves whether the Corsican species sprang from that of the
Alpes Maritimes, or _vice versâ_; or again, whether both diverged
in remote times from a common ancestor. Questions such as these
cannot be answered at present, but I hope the day may come when the
geographical distribution of the various existing forms of life will
be traced with sufficient accuracy to enable us to follow on the
map the lines along which affinity travels; and thus point out at
once the probable relationship between two given forms, and also the
route by which they reached their present stations. Records of local
varieties, and the careful discrimination between forms which have
small but permanent points of difference, thus acquire an importance
which they would not otherwise possess.

The geographical distribution of trap-door spiders is of peculiar
interest on account of the sedentary habits maintained during
life by the females. Most animals are capable of travelling long
distances, or of being accidentally transported from place to place
in such a way that colonies are frequently established far away from
the parent settlement, and we are left in the dark as to whence
they came and who are their nearest relations. But, in the case of
spiders inhabiting true trap-door nests, this is not so; they begin
life immediately on leaving the parent nest by making homes for
themselves near at hand which they will not desert, and there is no
likelihood of their being accidentally carried from place to place
unless occasionally by running water. Thus it happens that whenever
we find the same trap-door spider at two distant localities, we may
feel tolerably sure that the species has travelled from one to the
other by gradual extension, and that, either now or in times past, it
occupied all the intervening country.

For instance, we find _Nemesia Eleanora_ at Mentone, and again at
Cannes, while it has not yet been detected at Nice, Antibes, nor any
other intermediate point; but according to this hypothesis, this
species either does actually live, or has done so formerly, along
the whole intervening line. I will now enumerate the species alluded
to in the preceding pages and indicate briefly the habitats which
they are known with certainty to occupy.

I. _Atypus piceus_, Sulzer (ex Simon). The builder of the tubular
nest the silk lining of which is figured at A in Pl. XIII. It is
stated by M. Simon[46] to be common in all the centre, east, and west
of France, but it remains doubtful whether this exact form is found
in England or not, the true characters and habits of the English
species being still uncertain.

[Footnote 46: l.c. sup., p. 183.]

II. _Cyrtauchenius elongatus_, Simon, constructing the funnel type of
nest. It inhabits the neighbourhood of Fez in Morocco.

III. _Cteniza Moggridgii_, Cambridge (formerly described under the
name of _Ct. fodiens_[47]), one of the many builders of a nest of
the cork type; I have hitherto found this spider only at Mentone and
San Remo. It will probably be discovered in shady valleys in the
neighbourhood of Nice.

[Footnote 47: _Ants and Spiders_, p. 89.]

IV. _Ct. fodiens_, Camb. (_Ct. Sauvagii_, Rossi ex Simon): large nest
of cork type; inhabits Corsica. It has been said that the species
found near Pisa (_Ct. Sauvagii_) is the same as that which is so
common in Corsica, but it is desirable to have further confirmation
of this.

V. _Ct. Californica_, Camb.--Large nest of cork type. Found near
Visalia, about 350 miles south of San Francisco, by Mr. G. Treadwell.

VI. _Nemesia cæmentaria_, Latr.--Nest of cork type. Only known with
certainty to inhabit the neighbourhood of Montpellier.

VII. _N. Moggridgii_, Camb. (formerly described under the name of _N.
cæmentaria_, Latr.[48])--Nest of cork type; is found at San Remo,
Mentone, Cannes, Hyères, and Marseilles. Its range probably extends
some distance to the eastwards, but I doubt whether it does so
towards the west, for there I think it likely that it will be found
to be replaced by the typical _cæmentaria_.

[Footnote 48: _Ants and Spiders_, p. 92.]

VIII. _N. Simoni_, Camb.--Nest of the single-door unbranched wafer
type, discovered at Bordeaux in May, 1874.

IX. _N. suffusa_, Camb.--Nest of single-door branched wafer type,
discovered at Montpellier in May, 1873.

X. _N. Eleanora_, Camb.--Nest of double-door unbranched wafer type;
is found at San Remo, Mentone, Cannes, Vaucluse near Avignon. M.
Simon says[49] he has also found it at Digne, in the Basses Alpes.

[Footnote 49: E. Simon, _Aranéides nouveaux du Midi de l'Europe_, in
"Mém. Soc. Roy. Sc. de Liège," 2^{me}. ser. tom. v. p. 30.]

XI. _N. congener_, Camb.--Nest of double-door branched wafer type;
discovered at Hyères in May, 1873.

XII. _N. Manderstjernæ_, Koch, in Ausserer (formerly described under
the name of _N. meridionalis_, Costa).[50]--Nest of double-door,
branched, cavity wafer type; is found at San Remo, Bordighera,
Mentone, Nice, Cannes, and Hyères (apparently very rare at the
last-named place).

[Footnote 50: _Ants and Spiders_, p. 101.]

XIII. _N. meridionalis_, Costa.--Structure of nest doubtful (see
description in _Ants and Spiders_, p. 138). Found near Naples and
in Ischia. M. Simon has discovered a spider in Corsica which he
considers the same as that described by M. Costa under the name
of _meridionalis_, but it seems desirable, in order thoroughly to
establish this conclusion, that specimens of the spiders and their
nests from these distant habitats should be compared together.

We can scarcely suppose that the real geographical distribution of
the above-named twelve species is as restricted as it would appear to
be from the above enumeration, and there is little doubt, I think,
that many more habitats will be added in time. Indeed, our knowledge
of the habits and distribution of these spiders can only as yet be
said to be in its infancy, the whole subject being, for the most
part, new and untrodden ground.

But, it may be asked, what are the chances in the future for the
discovery of undescribed spiders and types of nests: and what reward
of this kind may the travelling naturalist expect in order to
compensate him for the time and pains which such a search demands,
and which must divert him in a great measure from making other
collections?

The reply is not doubtful.

Europe alone, most probably, contains many trap-door spiders the
specific characters and habits of which are at present unknown; and
as for the warmer regions of other parts of the globe, we only know
enough to lead us to surmise that still stranger and more startling
discoveries await us there.

Dr. L. Koch's description of the very remarkable branched-wafer
nest from Australia, alluded to above (p. 217), and the fragmentary
specimens of giant cork-nests from the same country exhibited at
the British Museum, give us a hint of what the Antipodes will some
day reveal to us; while a stray allusion to a trap-door nest found
near Lake Dilolo, in Southern Africa, by Livingstone,[51] affords
an indication of their existence in another quarter of the globe.
Hitherto but little importance has been attached by naturalists to
the study of the nests of trap-door spiders, but a knowledge of their
structure is often of the greatest assistance, and will, I venture to
predict, be found to afford a clue leading to the discovery of many
new species; for it not unfrequently happens that, while two spiders
appear so much alike as to pass for representatives of the same
species, their nests are totally dissimilar and proclaim them, as in
fact they are, quite distinct from one another. For an example of
this we have only to turn to the seven species of _Nemesia_, treated
of in the foregoing pages, of which six construct dissimilar nests,
and only two, building nests of the cork type, make them alike,
though the general resemblance between the spiders themselves is
extraordinarily close. Thus far, indeed, it will be seen that no two
distinct species of European trap-door spider make wafer nests of the
same type, each kind of wafer nest having its own peculiar spider.

[Footnote 51: "A large reddish spider (_Mygale_), named by the
natives 'sclàli,' runs about with great velocity. Its nest is most
ingeniously covered with a hinged cover or door, about the size of a
shilling, the inner face of which is of a pure white silky substance
like paper, while the outer one is coated with earth precisely like
that in which the hole is made, so that when it is closed it is
quite impossible to detect the situation of the nest. Unfortunately
the cavity for breeding is never seen except when the owner is out,
and has left the door open behind her."--_Dr. Livingstone_, _from_
"_Popular Accounts of Travels in South Africa_," chap. xvii. p. 221.]

This strikes me as a very curious fact, and I await with interest the
discovery of new species of wafer-building spiders in order to learn
whether this will continue to hold good or not.

That such discoveries will be made I entertain no doubt; indeed, I
have reason to believe that, even at Mentone, where perhaps more
pairs of eyes have been at work searching for trap-door spiders than
anywhere else, new species still remain to be detected. In April,
1873, the surface door of a wafer-nest together with a very small
portion of the tube was brought to me from the summit of the Aiguille
mountain, near Mentone. I was greatly surprised to learn that a
trap-door spider could live in such a situation, for the earth on
that plateau, which has an elevation of 4032 feet above the sea, is
always frozen hard for weeks and even months together during the
winter, and snow frequently lingers there. The spider, therefore,
which endures these conditions is scarcely likely to be of the
same species as any one of those inhabiting the lower country. The
trap-door spiders of these spurs of the Maritime Alps, are probably
of distinct species from those of the plains, but they are absolutely
unknown at present.

Then the males of several species, as, for example, those of _Nemesia
Simoni_, _N. suffusa_, _N. congener_, and _N. Moggridgii_, have yet
to be discovered; while of the habits of the males in general we know
little or nothing.

Indeed, there is no one species with the habits of which we can
say we are thoroughly acquainted, and we must admit that up to the
present time these ingenious little architects have been at least as
successful in concealing themselves from the intrusion of naturalists
as from the attacks of their proper enemies.

Surely these trap-door spiders, which have lain quiet in the earth
century after century, have hidden themselves long enough from our
inquisitive admiration, and the time has now come for us to seek them
out and learn their ways.




SPECIFIC DESCRIPTIONS OF TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS,

BY

THE REV O. PICKARD-CAMBRIDGE.


Genus Cteniza, Latr.

Cteniza Moggridgii, sp. n., Plate XX., fig. A, p. 254.

_Cteniza fodiens_ (Camb.)? ♀ in _Harvesting Ants and Trap-door
Spiders_, J. T. Moggridge, 1873, p. 89, Plate VII., excluding
synonyms there quoted.

Adult male length 5-1/2 lines, length of cephalothorax 3 lines,
breadth 2-1/2.

The cephalothorax is of a short, broad-oval form, its length being
only half a line greater than its breadth; it is flattened-convex
above, and depressed near the margins, the _caput_ (when looked
at in profile) scarcely rising above the level of the thorax.
At the junction of the caput and thoracic segments is a deep,
circularly-curved indentation, or fovea, the curve of which is
directed backwards; the extremities of this indentation are continued
obliquely forwards on either side, forming the normal ones which
indicate the junction of the caput and thorax. Rather more than
one-third of the distance between the above curved indentation and
the fore margin of the caput is a very perceptible and deep but
narrow, slightly curved, transverse indentation which divides the
caput into two distinct parts; the curve of this indentation is
directed forwards. The normal thoracic indentations are well marked,
but not very strong; the surface of the thorax, though shining,
appeared under a lens to be covered with fine rugulosities. Its
colour is yellow-brown; a large triangular patch on either side
of the caput being tinged with orange, and the rest suffused with
dark brown. The caput is of a dark reddish yellow-brown, showing
(in spirit of wine) two longitudinal bars, or strong lines, of a
clearer orange yellow-brown colour; its surface is glossy, though,
under a lens, the sides of the fore part are very finely striated or
rugulose. These lines begin behind the extremities of the hinder row
of eyes, and gradually converge to a point at the thoracic junction;
the ocular region and central longitudinal line of the fore-segment
of the caput have some long and very prominent black bristles.
When alive, the cephalothorax appears to have been suffused with a
purplish hue, corresponding to that of the abdomen and other parts.

[Illustration: _Plate XX._]

The _eyes_ form a rectangular figure, whose fore side is a little
shorter than the hinder one, and whose transverse, or longest,
diameter is as nearly as possible double the length of its shortest
one; the eyes of the central or fore-central pair are small, and
separated by a diameter's distance from each other. The hind laterals
are the smallest of the eight, and each is almost contiguous to the
hind-central nearest to it, this latter being of a sub-triangular
form, and separated from the fore-central on its side by an interval
equal to that which divides the two fore-centrals, but less than
that which separates each fore-central from the fore-lateral on its
side. Looked at as in two transverse rows of four each, those of
the foremost row are darkish coloured, while those of the hinder
row are pearly white. Omitting the eyes of the hind-central pair,
the remaining three on either side form as nearly as possible an
equilateral triangle.

The _legs_ are long, moderately strong, their relative length being
4, 1, 2, 3. They are of a dark brown colour, generally paler on the
under sides, furnished with hairs, fine bristles, and spines; the
latter are numerous and strong beneath the metatarsi and tibiæ of
the first and second pairs; on those of the third pair they are less
strong and more uniformly disposed; on those of the fourth pair they
are fewest and least conspicuous. The genual joints of the third
pair have some strongish spines on the outer side; the right leg has
eight, the left nine. The toothing of the superior tarsal claws does
not appear to be uniform on the different legs of the same example;
on those of the fourth pair there were five teeth; on those of the
first pair eight or nine, with two others, quite rudimentary, towards
the point of the claw; and even on one of the fourth pair of legs one
of the claws had six, the other five teeth. The tarsal claws of the
second pair are toothed throughout nearly their whole length with
from eight to ten teeth; on _one_ of the third pair the teeth were
but five or six, while on the other there were on one claw but three
ordinary teeth and a much stronger one a little way off in front of
them, on the second claw only a single strong tooth about the middle,
and a smaller one close to its base.

The _palpi_ are long and rather slender, measuring rather over
six lines in length; they are similar in colour to the legs, and
excepting a few--from twelve to fourteen--short strong spines on
the upper side of the extremity of the digital joint, furnished with
hairs only. The cubital joint is more than half the length of the
radial; this latter is equal in length to the humeral joint, and
nearly as long as the femora of the first pair of legs. The digital
joint is short, of an oblong oval form, broadest at its extremity.
The palpal organs consist of a nearly spherical corneous lobe,
prolonged at its fore extremity into a long, slender, tapering,
beak-like spine, curving upwards (_i.e._, with its point near to the
radial joint), and inwards.

A broad, conspicuous, shining, corneous band, of a deeper red-brown
than the rest, runs round the middle (or equatorial line) of the
spherical portion of these organs, covering the greater part of their
surface.

The _falces_ are of moderate length and strength, and of ordinary
form. They are similar in colour to the legs, and furnished in front,
chiefly on their inner edges, with hairs, and at their extremities
on the inner sides, with a few, but not very strong nor conspicuous,
short spines; their under side (along which the fang lies) is toothed
on the inner edge only; the fang is strong and curved, but presents
nothing remarkable in form, nor could I detect either denticulation
or serration.

The _maxillæ_ are strong, straight, divergent, with a small prominent
point at the inner extremity of each; they are as strong, but not so
long, as the basal (coxal) joints of the legs of the first pair, of a
yellow-brown colour, furnished with hairs, but with no spines of any
sort or size.

The _labium_ is similar in colour to the maxillæ, and somewhat
quadrate in shape, rounded at the apex; it is furnished with hairs
only.

The _sternum_ is of a sub-pentagonal form, much broader behind than
in front; its colour is dull yellowish-brown, and it is furnished
with hairs, leaving two largish, bare, round, slightly impressed
patches, not far from each other, in a transverse line near the
middle.

The _abdomen_ is short-oval in form, and very convex above; it
projects a little over the base of the cephalothorax, and its upper
side is of a purplish grey-brown hue, mottled with a pale dull
whitish-yellow, and furnished sparingly with hairs. The sides and
under side are of a uniform dull whitish-yellow. The _spinners_ (four
in number) are, as usual, of very unequal size, those of the superior
pair longish, strong, three-jointed, and up-turned, the inferior
pair short but stout, consisting of one joint only and pretty close
together.

The _female_ (as it is conjectured to be) of this species was
described, in the work to which the present publication is
supplementary, from examples found at Mentone. There is little doubt
now but that it is not _Ct. fodiens_, Walck., but whether or not
identical with the male above described is not absolutely certain.
I think myself (with Mr. Moggridge, see p. 195) that it is so, in
spite of some differences in the relative size of the eyes, the
toothing of the under side of the falces, and the denticulation
of the tarsal claws. With regard to the eyes and falces, I am not
inclined to lay special stress upon these differences. It is found
that in other groups of spiders whose cephalothorax varies very
markedly in development in the two sexes, differences of this nature
occur. In the present genus, the male has an almost flat caput,
while the female has a strongly elevated one; and with respect to
the variation in the tarsal claws, no special weight can be attached
to it in the present instance, since these claws are not uniformly
denticulated in the different feet of the same individual. Another
difference is the absence in the male of sundry small but distinct
tooth-like spines at the apex of the labium and the inner corner of
the base of the maxillæ; the female is also wanting in regard to the
very characteristic transverse indentation which divides the caput
of the male into two parts. I can, however, trace in the female the
slightest possible corresponding depression, scarcely amounting to an
indentation, and placed rather nearer to the junctional thoracic pit.

With regard to the differences between this species and _Ct.
Sauvagii_, Latr. (_Ct. fodiens_, Walck.), size alone would suffice to
distinguish them; two females of the latter now before me measuring
13 lines in length; while the male (_Aran. nouv. ou peu connus du
Midi de l'Europe_, par Eugène Simon, Mém., Liège, 1873) measures 8
lines (17 mm.) and the female rather over 14 lines (30 mm.), the
fore-central eyes in the female of _Ct. Sauvagii_ appeared to be
smaller than those in _Ct. Moggridgii_ and placed rather farther
forwards, but the eyes in both are otherwise remarkably similar
both in size and position. The males, however, cannot be confounded
inasmuch as, according to M. Simon, no trace of any transverse
indentation on the caput exists in _Ct. Sauvagii_.

The denticulation of the tarsal claws in the females of both species
is similar, but M. Simon does not mention this portion of the
structure of the male he describes of _Ct. Sauvagii_.

The adult male of _Ct. Moggridgii_ above described, was found behind
the stones of an old wall at Mentone, but not in any kind of nest.

Nest-making, and excavating for that purpose, is, probably, no part
of the work of the adult males in this and other allied genera, and
hence we can see a reason for differences in the development of the
caput, and the denticulation of the falces. The usual habitat of the
females and their nests is in damp and shady spots, whereas _Ct.
Sauvagii_ constructs its nests in dry exposed banks.

_Habitat._ Mentone and San Remo.


Cteniza Californica, sp. n., Plate XV., fig. B, p. 198.

Adult female; length very nearly 14 lines; length of the
cephalothorax, 5-1/2; greatest breadth of ditto, 5; breadth of fore
part of caput, 4 lines; length of caput rather over 3 lines.

The _cephalothorax_ of this spider is rather broader in proportion to
its length than that of _Ct. Sauvagii_, Walck., Sim. = _Ct. fodiens_,
Walck. The convexity, or elevation, of the caput is also less, but
that of the thorax is greater, so that (when looked at in profile)
the profile line of the two forms a tolerably even and continuous
slope, interrupted only by the thoracic fovea; the profile, however,
of the occiput is curved.

The thoracic fovea, or junctional indentation, is strong, deep, and
semilunar in form, the horns of the crescent pointing forwards; the
other normal indentations are well marked, but those which divide
the caput from the first thoracic segment do not unite with the
extremities of the junctional fovea, being in this respect unlike
_Ct. Moggridgii_, but more like _Ct. Sauvagii_. The _clypeus_,
although transversely impressed, yet slopes forward more gradually
than in either of those species, its breadth is about equal to that
of the ocular area, or amounts to half that of the facial space. The
colour of the cephalothorax, taken from the specimen preserved in
spirit of wine, is a deep reddish-yellow brown, gradually getting
paler towards the margins. When alive, I understand that the general
colour of the whole spider was a dark blackish chocolate brown, the
legs and cephalothorax being darker than the abdomen; there are a few
prominent bristly hairs in the medial line both before and behind the
ocular area.

The _eyes_ form a narrow transverse oblong figure, its length being
about two and a half times its width, and its fore side is a little
the shortest; the fore-lateral eyes are large and oval, and by far
the largest of the eight; the rest do not differ much in size, though
perhaps the hind laterals, which are also oval, are a little the
largest; the longest diameter of these, however, is less than half
the longest diameter of the fore laterals. The interval between the
fore and hind laterals is small, only equal to the shortest diameter
of the hind lateral; and this interval is nearly double that which
separates each hind lateral and the hind central nearest to it. The
hind laterals and hind centrals form an almost perfectly straight
line, the former being very slightly indeed within the straight line
of the former; the intervals which separate the fore centrals from
each other, and each of them from the fore lateral on its side, are
as nearly as possible equal, though very slightly, if at all, less
than that which separates each of them from the hind central on its
side: the interval which separates the fore laterals is double the
length of the longest diameter of one of them.

The _legs_ are short and very strong; they are like the cephalothorax
in colour, but paler underneath the femora; this joint in the third
pair is proportionally much stronger than in the other legs; all are
furnished with hairs, bristles, and spines, a group of erect bristles
among the rest occupies the fore part of the upper side of the
metatarsi of the first and second pairs; strong spines of different
lengths are thickly placed beneath and on the lower part of the sides
of the tibiæ tarsi and metatarsi of the first and second pairs. On
the tarsi and metatarsi of the third and fourth pairs similar spines
are distributed more uniformly over the whole surface of the joints,
and on the genual joint of the 3rd pair there is one short strong
spine near its extremity on the outer side, those on the tibiæ both
of the third and fourth pairs being confined to a few on the outer
side, and towards the lower side only. Each tarsus terminates with
three claws, of which the two superior ones have a single strong
tooth towards the base on the lower side.

The _palpi_ are rather long, strong, and similar in colour to the
legs. They are furnished with hairs, bristles, and spines; of the
latter the radial and digital joints have some short and strong ones,
pretty thickly grouped along both their outer and inner sides; the
digital joint ends with a single untoothed claw.

The _falces_ are strong and massive, more so than in _Ct. Sauvagii_,
but of normal form. They are furnished with hairs and bristles, and
with strong spines near their inner extremities on the upper side;
the fangs are strong, folded along the under side of the falces in a
furrow which is toothed along either edge. The colour of the falces
is a rich deep red-brown.

The _maxillæ_ are strong, straight, divergent, with a prominent point
at the inner extremity, and some very short, strong, tooth-like
spines at their base; their colour is dull yellow-brown, and, with
the labium and sternum, they are thickly clothed with short strong
hairs.

The _labium_ is dark yellow-brown, tipped slightly with black; it is
of a somewhat semilunar form, and has a few very short tooth-like
spines near its apex.

The _sternum_ is of a rough oval form, broadest behind and shorter
and broader in proportion than that of _Ct. Sauvagii_ and _Ct.
Moggridgii_; its colour is dull yellow-brown, and it is destitute of
the two shining bare patches conspicuous in both those species.

The _abdomen_ is large, short-oval, broadest behind and very convex
above; it is of a dull yellowish-brown colour, thickly mottled with
minute dark points seen through a lens to be little rings, from the
centre of each of which springs a bristly hair; the underside is
paler; the spinners and spiracular openings are normal. As observed
above, the colour of the abdomen was rather different in life; it
was then of a deep blackish chocolate brown, with an indistinct
longitudinal line along the middle of its fore part on the upper
side, intersected by a similar line at right angles; but these lines
soon disappeared after death; the specimen had been in spirit of wine
some months before the present description was made.

A single example, with its tubular nest of the cork-lid type, was
received alive from California in 1873, and appears to have been
hitherto undescribed; though no larger than _Ct. Sauvagii_, it is yet
a stouter and more massive spider, and may readily be distinguished
by the large size of its fore-lateral eyes, the narrower ocular area
arising from the far greater proximity to each other of the eyes of
each lateral pair, the less convexity of the caput, and the greater
convexity of the thorax, as well as by its being altogether a darker
coloured spider, and having shorter stouter legs.

_Habitat._ Visalia, 350 miles south of San Francisco, California.


Gen. Nemesia, Savigny.

Nemesia Cæmentaria, Plate XIX., fig. B, p. 229.

_Mygale cæmentaria_ (Latr.) _Hist. Nat. des Crust._ t. vii. p. 164.

--♀--Walck., _Hist. Nat. des Ins. Apt._ 1, p. 235.

---- ---- _Cuvier's Règne Animal_, ed. Paris. 20 vols. 18--? Pl I.,
_A. Dugès del._ ♂ _et_ ♀.

Adult female, length 7 to 9 lines.

_Cephalothorax_ oval, truncated and almost equally broad at each
end; the upper surface is moderately convex, the caput elevated a
little above the rest, and equally rounded on the sides and upper
part; the profile of the whole cephalothorax forms a general sloping
slightly curved line, broken by the thoracic junctional pit or
fovea, which is narrow but strong, and gently but equally curved, the
convexity of the curve directed forwards; the thorax next to this
fovea is rather gibbous, but not over any great extent of surface;
the other normal indentations are tolerably strong; the colour of the
cephalothorax is yellow-brown, darkest on the sides of the caput,
and along the thoracic indentations, palest on the margins, forming
a pale marginal border indistinctly vandyked on the inner edge. The
surface is clothed, but not densely, with yellowish-grey adpressed
hairs; there are a few black bristles in a straight transverse
line, directed forwards from the lower margin of the clypeus; also
a few more bristles curved and of various lengths before and behind
the ocular area, their points meeting over this area, and a row of
strong, nearly erect ones in a longitudinal central line from the
ocular area to the junctional fovea; besides these are a few more,
finer and less conspicuous, along the middle both of the caput and
thorax; the colour on either side and in front of the ocular area is
orange yellow-brown, and joining with this a broad band of the same
runs backwards from the ocular area to the thoracic fovea. The band
begins as wide as this area, it then directly enlarges a little, and
thence tapers slightly and gradually to its termination, forming a
truncate wedge, with the margins rather irregular, but on the whole
a little curved. This band is not immaculate, there being two dark
yellow-brown tapering lines or bars along the greater part of its
length; these bars begin from each outer pair of eyes of the hinder
row, and tapering to a fine line, converge to the thoracic fovea,
but do not quite meet. It is important to note the exact form and
distribution of the central band and these tapering bars, as their
differences from the character of the similar part in another closely
allied species are strongly specific; the above description holds
good in above twenty examples before me.

The _eyes_ are in two transverse lines, forming an area whose length
is rather less than 2-1/2 times its width; the foremost line is
curved, and the curve directed backwards, the hinder one is also
curved and in a similar direction, but less strongly, looking
laterally the extreme margin of the four eyes of the hinder row forms
a straight line. Considered as in pairs, those of the fore-central
pair are separated by an interval equal to that which separates
each from the fore-lateral and hind-central nearest to it; the
fore-laterals are divided by about two and a half diameters; they are
the largest of the eight, only slightly however, in some examples,
larger than the hind-laterals. Each of them is separated from the
hind-lateral on its side by not quite half the diameter of the
latter, and each hind-lateral is very nearly but not quite contiguous
to the hind-central on its side; the hind-centrals are roughly
rounded, smallest of the eight, though in some examples equal in size
to the fore-centrals, and are separated from the fore-central nearest
to it by about one diameter, which gives a clue to the absolute
distance between the eyes of the foremost pair. The four lateral eyes
are oval, the fore-centrals round; those of the foremost row are
darkish coloured, while those of the hinder row are pearly white.

Although it is of great importance to observe as accurately as
possible the relative position and size of the eyes, yet we must be
prepared to find exceptions to the rule derived from the most exact
measurements in any individual instance.

In the present species the above conclusions, as to position and
size, are drawn from a consideration and comparison of 20 examples,
and are, it is believed, pretty true, but yet in one example, one
of the hind central eyes was but half the size of the other, and
in another example one of the same eyes was but one-fourth of that
of the other, a mere dot in fact, and the relative size of the
respective lateral eyes of the two rows do not appear to maintain
exactly the same proportions in all individuals. The height of the
clypeus appeared to be as nearly as possible half that of the facial
space.

The _legs_ are strong, moderately long, their relative length 4,
1, 2, 3, though in some examples those of the second and third
pairs are equal in length; in others, those of the third pair are
slightly longer than those of the second; here again, as with the
eyes, although the relative proportion of the legs of spiders is an
important specific point, and in general tolerably reliable, yet
accurate observation and measurements prove that there are small
differences in individual instances. The legs are yellow-brown
in colour, furnished with hairs, bristles, and a few spines. The
outer sides of the genual joints of the third pair are destitute of
spines; in two instances only out of 20, this joint had a single, not
very conspicuous, spine. The superior tarsal claws have 4-5 minute
pectinations underneath near their base.

The _palpi_ are moderately long and strong, and similar in colour
and general armature to the legs; they terminate with a single,
strong, sharply curved untoothed claw.

The _falces_ are of a deep black red-brown colour, strong and
prominent, and flat, but not cut away, on their inner sides; they are
furnished on their upper sides with black bristles and yellowish-grey
hairs, disposed in longitudinal lines; these bristles are strongest
and most numerous on the inner margin of the upper side, increasing
in strength forwards where, near the extremity, are some strong
spines.

On the inner edge of the under side of each falx is a row of teeth,
and each fang is also denticulate or finely serrate, beneath towards
its hinder part.

The _maxillæ_ are strong, cylindrical, and divergent; and each has a
small bluntish angular prominence at the extremity on the inner side;
their inner margin has a thick fringe of pale reddish hairs, the fore
surface being clothed (as ordinarily) with dark bristly hairs, and
there are a few black minute tooth-like spines in a line (sometimes
in a small group) near the inner corner of their base.

The _labium_ is short, broad, its breadth nearly double its length,
and the upper corners rather rounded off; there are some strongish
bristles, mostly towards the apex, but no tooth-like spines nor
denticulations.

The _sternum_ is oval, rather convex, broadest towards the hinder
part, which is pointed at this extremity but hollow-truncate before.

The _abdomen_ is sparingly clothed with hairs; it is of a stoutish
regular oval form, and of a dull brownish yellow colour; its
fore extremity on the upper side is thickly blotched with deep
blackish-brown, and the whole length spanned by a series of about
five curved, or slightly angular, stoutish bars or chevrons,
formed of more or less confluent, dark, blackish-brown blotches
and markings; a more or less indistinct line of a similar nature
also divides the fore part of the upper side of the abdomen
longitudinally. There is some variety in the extent, depth, and
distinctness of these markings, but the figures given (Pl. XIX., p.
229, figs. B, B 1) show the appearance of an average example.

It must be remembered that this description is made from examples
in spirit of wine, and that in life the markings (especially on the
cephalothorax) are often considerably obscured by the hairs on the
surface; when seen through spirit the actual tints of colour are
sometimes misrepresented, but the characteristic markings are seen
more distinctly.

The lower part of the sides and the underside of the abdomen are of a
uniform pale dull brownish-yellow; the spinners of the superior pair
are short, strong, and 2-jointed; those of the inferior pair are very
minute, and near together at the base of, and almost between, the
others.

Adult and immature females were found in 1873-4 abundantly at
Montpellier in France, in unbranched tubular nests closed at the
surface with a close-fitting "cork" lid.

In _Harvesting Ants and Trap-door Spiders_, p. 92, a spider
inhabiting similar nests, and found commonly at _Cannes_ and Mentone
was described as _N. cæmentaria_, Latr. The subsequent discovery
however of a very closely allied, but certainly distinct, species
in abundance at Montpellier (the locality in which the original
_N. cæmentaria_, Latr., was found) makes it more than probable that
the _Montpellier_, and not the Mentone, species is the true _N.
cæmentaria_. Certainly as yet no other species more likely than this
to be the one described by Latreille has been found at Montpellier;
in fact, the one here described is the common one found there, and
alone answers to Latreille's character of having a nest with a lid of
the cork type.

It has become therefore necessary now to record the Mentone species
under another name, and under that name, "_N. Moggridgii_" (p. 273)
will be noted the specific differences by which the two species may
be at once distinguished from each other.

The male of the spider here described has not been yet found. A
description is given (p. 276) of a male spider, _Nemesia incerta_
(no doubt closely allied), found by M. Eugène Simon at Digne;
but reasons will be given why it is not probable that this Digne
spider should be, as conjectured by M. Simon, the male of the
Montpellier species. Whether the _N. carminans_ (Latr.) is the male
of _N. cæmentaria_ (Latr.) or not, is another question, and one
surrounded with some obscurity and difficulty. Latreille described
_N. cæmentaria_ (female) from Montpellier, and _N. carminans_ (male)
from Aix in Provence; the latter being specially characterized by a
bifid point to the prolongation of the palpal bulb; L. Dufour appears
subsequently to have considered _N. carminans_, Latr. (male) to be
the male of _N. cæmentaria_, and Latreille appears to have agreed
with L. Dufour upon this, _vide_ Walck. _Ins. Apt._, i. p. 236; but
Dufour afterwards (_Ann. Gen. Sc. Phys._, tom. v. Bruxelles, 1820,
p. 103) introduced an element of confusion into the question by
describing _N. carminans_ as having the point of the palpal organs
simple, "nullement bifid," and throwing out a suggestion that it
might be the male of _N. Sauvagii_, Latr., (= _N. pionnière_ or
_fodiens_, Walck.) Latreille upon this (_Vues générales sur les
Aranéides, Acad. Roy. des Sc._, 1830, pp. 64, 65) explains Dufour's
suggestion as an inadvertence, but takes no notice of the difference
of the form of the palpal organs as described by him; at the same
time however Latreille explains why, probably, Walckenaer "still
considers (in his _Faune française_) _N. carminans_ to be a distinct
species." We may conclude from this that Latreille never altered
_his_ opinion that his own _N. cæmentaria_ and _N. carminans_ were
the two sexes of the same species; and we shall probably rightly
agree with Walckenaer that Dufour had another species before him,
which he wrongly (l.c.) described as _N. carminans_.

Subsequently again a male and female spider, evidently of one
species, were figured by Dugès to illustrate _N. cæmentaria_ male and
female in Cuvier's _Règne Animal_--Edition in 20 vols. not numbered
and without date, published in Paris, "_accompagnée de Planches par
une réunion de disciples de Cuvier, MM. Audouin, Blanchard, Deshayes,
Aleide d'Orbigny, Doyère, Dugès, Duvernoy, Laurillard, Milne Edwards,
Roulin, et Valenciennes_." Of these figures, that of the male has the
point of the palpal organs distinctly bifid, and the nest figured is
of the cork-lid type.

On the whole it may be concluded that the male of the true _N.
cæmentaria_, Latr., will be found to have the bifid point to the
palpal organs, but the question cannot be considered settled until
further researches at Montpellier and Aix (in Provence) shall have
furnished _males_ of the _N. cæmentaria_ now described, and _females_
of the bifid pointed male--_N. carminans_, Latr.--for of course it
is possible that Latreille's _first_ views of the distinctness of
_cæmentaria_ and _carminans_ may be the correct ones.

The characters of the species now described accord so well with
the figures of the female in Dugès' plate (above mentioned) that
little doubt can be entertained of _their_ identity, and if so there
would seem to be little doubt also, but that further research at
Montpellier will reveal a male similar to the male figured by Dugès.

_Habitat._ Montpellier, France.


Nemesia Eleanora.

_Syn. Nemesia Eleanora_, Cambr., male and female, in _Harvesting Ants
and Trap-door Spiders_, by J. T. Moggridge, p. 180, Pl. XII. and
woodcuts, p. 109.

_Nemesia Alpigrada_ (Simon) male, _Aranéides nouv. ou peu connus du
Midi de l'Europe_, 2^e Mémoire. Liège, 1873, 2^e sér. t. v. p. 27
(separate copy.).

There is but little to add to the descriptions given (l.c. _supra_).
It must however be noted that the spines on the outer side of the
genual joints of the third pair of legs, then supposed to be a
characteristic of the present species only, are now found to exist
in several others, with some small exceptions in regard to number,
and also in respect to strict uniformity, on both legs of the same
individual. In _N. cæmentaria_ (p. 264), however, there is rarely
found even a single spine on either of these joints; and not one out
of ten examples of another species, _N. Simoni_ (p. 297), had even
one of these spines.

Shortly after the publication of _Harvesting Ants and Trap-door
Spiders_ the male of this species was described by M. Simon (l.c.)
from two examples taken at Vaucluse near Avignon.

_Habitats._ San Remo, Mentone, Cannes, Vaucluse near Avignon, and,
according to M. Simon, Digne, Basses Alpes.


Nemesia Moggridgii, sp. n., Plate XIX., fig. C, p. 229.

_Syn. Nemesia Cæmentaria_, Cambr., in _Harvesting Ants and Trap-door
Spiders_, (by J. T. Moggridge), p. 93, Pl. VIII.

This spider is exceedingly closely allied to the foregoing and was
thought to be the true _N. cæmentaria_, Latr., until subsequent
researches at Montpellier (the locality where Latreille's types were
found) have resulted in the belief that the Montpellier, rather
than the Mentone species, is that described by him. At present the
females only of the two species are known, and these may readily be
distinguished by the pattern on the caput.

In the foregoing (the _Montpellier Spider_) a broad orange
yellow-brown band runs from the ocular area to the thoracic
fovea, tapering gradually to that part, where it is truncated,
forming a wedge with the point cut off. This wedge-shaped band is
charged with two longitudinal, more or less distinct, dark brown
irregularly-tapering lines, running throughout its whole length and
converging towards each other but not touching.

In the _Mentone Spider_ there are three orange-yellow-brown
well-defined bars or longitudinal lines between the ocular area
and the thoracic fovea; the central bar tapers and reaches from
the eyes to the fovea, the lateral ones never more than two-thirds
of the distance from it to the eyes, diverging a little from the
central bar as they run forwards. These two lateral bars are not
straight, _i.e._, their margins are more or less notched or roughly
angular, forming in some examples a line of a somewhat zigzag or bent
character. It may perhaps be observed that when the two dark brown
lines which run along the broad orange-yellow-brown band on the caput
of the Montpellier spider, are well marked, this also leaves three
longitudinal yellow lines, somewhat similar to those just described
in the Mentone species, but there is this difference even then (and
it is constant throughout a long series of examples), the lateral
lines in the Montpellier spider _always run through to the eyes_,
equalling in length the central line, while in the Mentone spider the
_lateral bars never reach the eyes_, always stopping short of the
ocular area, by one-half, or nearly so, of their length.

Another distinction which appears constant is the form of the
thoracic fovea; in the Montpellier species this forms a slight
but uniform curve; in the Mentone spider it is more sharply bent
at the apex (or centre of the curve), forming in most examples a
bluntish-angular line.

In the eyes there appears to be but little reliable difference; if
there be any at all constant, it seems to be that in the present
(Mentone) species the fore-laterals are constantly smaller than the
hind-laterals, and sometimes smaller than the fore-centrals. A close
examination, however, of the relative size and position of the eyes
in a series of examples, lowers one's estimation of the _absolute_
value of this character in the determination of the species of
_Nemesia_; still it is a specific character not by any means to
be overlooked, though to be used guardedly, and often with great
reservation.

In regard to other characters and general description there seems but
little to add to the description given (l.c. _supra_), except that
the labium has no denticulations at its apex and the outer sides of
the genual joints of the third pair of legs are generally without
spines. Occasionally (in one example out of sixteen) there is a
single spine on this joint, of either the right or left leg. In this
character, however (differing from several others described below),
the Montpellier spider agrees with that from Mentone.

In both spiders, the fangs of the falces are (in some instances at
least) denticulated. Also in regard to the relative lengths of the
legs, like those of the Montpellier spider, the second and third
pairs of the Mentone species are not constant in their relative
proportions, though the differences either way are very slight, and
there is often no difference whatever.

The nest and habits of the two species appear to be nearly, if not
quite, similar.

In naming the present species (at the suggestion of M. Eugène
Simon) the writer of these descriptions gladly testifies to his
appreciation of the great value attaching to Mr. Traherne Moggridge's
investigations of the habits of the closely-allied species of this
very difficult, though most interesting group of spiders.

M. Eugène Simon (_Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr._ 1873, Bull, c.), perceiving
the difference between the present species and the one known to
himself as _N. cæmentaria_, Latr., concludes it to be identical with
_N. meridionalis_, Sim. Examples, however, of this latter, from M.
Simon's cabinet, show that they are very distinct.

On _N. meridionalis_, Sim., see p. 289; and on _N. cæmentaria_, Sim.,
p. 280, M. Simon has, I understand, subsequently admitted the error
of his conclusion, published l.c. _supra_.

_Habitat._ San Remo, Mentone, Cannes, Hyères, and Marseilles.


Nemesia incerta, sp. n., Plate XIX., fig. D, p. 229.

Adult male, length slightly above 4-1/2 lines.

_Cephalothorax_ oval, truncate at each end; moderately convex
above, the profile line forming a pretty even, sloping, curved
line, but flattish in the middle near the thoracic fovea, which is
of a strongly curved form; the other normal indentations are not
strong, though fairly defined; the colour of the cephalothorax is
yellow-brown, palish and clothed with yellowish-grey adpressed hairs
on the margins, and inclining to orange on the caput. The clypeus
is somewhat steep, about equal to half the height of the facial
space, and the sides of the caput are dark blackish-brown, leaving
a longitudinal, central reddish orange-brown band tapering to the
thoracic fovea.

The upper and hinder part of the thorax is strongly suffused with
brown, leaving broad but irregular pale lateral margins; there is a
group of strong bristles directed forwards from the margin of the
clypeus, and two or three more in the median line behind the ocular
area.

The _eyes_ are on a strongish oblong dark brown transverse
tubercular eminence; the fore-laterals are rather smaller than
the hind-laterals, and the fore-centrals are larger than the
hind-centrals, the latter being much the smallest of the eight; the
interval between those of each lateral pair is about equal to, or
slightly larger than, the diameter of one of the fore-central eyes;
the intervals between the four eyes of the front row are equal, each
interval being equal to the diameter of one of the fore-centrals;
and each hind-central eye is separated from the fore-central nearest
to it by as nearly as possible a similar distance, and from the
hind-lateral on its side by a very small but distinct interval.

The _legs_ are rather long, strong, of a brownish-yellow colour,
suffused with blackish-brown on the upper sides of the femora, and
furnished with hairs, bristles, and spines. Those of the hinder
(fourth) pair were wanting, the relative lengths of the others
being 1, 2, 3; 2 and 3 being very nearly equal. The spines are not
numerous, being disposed mostly on the tibiæ and metatarsi of the
third pair; some, however, had been evidently broken off; all the
tarsi were without spines; each tarsus ends with three claws, the
superior pair with several--6-8?--teeth on their under sides.

The tibial joint of each of the first pair is short, no longer than
the genual joint, but it is strong and enlarged gradually beneath
to its fore extremity, where it ends in a strong, sharp-pointed,
tapering red-brown curved spine, directed downwards, forwards, and
inwards. Each tarsus of the first and second pairs is pretty thickly
fringed just below on each side along its whole length, with short
strongish hairs of an even length.

On the outer side of the genual joint of the third pair (left leg)
are three spines in a longitudinal row; the other leg of this pair
was wanting.

The _palpi_ are moderately long, and similar in colour and general
armature to the legs; the radial joint is strong, a little tapering
forwards, and somewhat curved underneath towards its hinder part;
its length is about double that of the digital joint, and from its
fore extremity on the upper side, three strong, somewhat sessile,
spines of equal length, and directed forwards issue, in a straight
transverse line.

The palpal organs consist of a roundish corneous bulb drawn out into
a longish, tapering, curved, sharp-pointed spine, the point being
very fine, gradual, and directed outwards.

The _falces_ are strong, prominent, of a deep red-brown colour,
furnished above with dull greyish-yellow hairs mixed with dark
bristles, and disposed in longitudinal stripes; and near the upper
extremity on the inner side are four strongish spines.

The _maxillæ_ are strong, divergent, cylindrical, with a small
angular prominence at their inner extremity; they are furnished with
hairs, but no denticulations, and there is a strong fringe of reddish
hairs on their inner margins. The maxillæ are of the same colour as
the palpi.

The _labium_ is short and broad; its breadth double its height and
its apex rounded. Its junction with the _sternum_ appeared to be
about at right angles. It is darker in colour than the maxillæ, but
with a paler apex; its surface is furnished with bristly hairs, but
there are no denticulations at its apex. _Sternum_ oval, truncate
before, pointed behind, furnished with bristly hairs, and of the same
colour as the legs.

The _abdomen_ is of an oblong-oval form, truncate before, and
tolerably convex above; it is of a pale dull yellowish colour clothed
with yellow-grey hairs, among which are a good many prominent
dark bristly ones; the fore part of the upper side is irregularly
marked with black-brown; following this towards the hinder part,
and reaching half way or more to the spinners, is an indistinct
longitudinal central line of the same colour, throwing off numerous
short lateral lines at right angles; towards either side of the
hinder two-thirds of the abdomen are several oblique black-brown
lines extending more or less over the sides; one, about the middle,
extends farther over the sides than the rest, and almost unites with
a curved deep black-brown transverse line crossing the under side of
the abdomen a little way in front of the spinners.

The under side of the abdomen is similar in colour to the upper
side, and, besides the transverse dark line above mentioned, there
is another touching the anterior margins of the posterior spiracular
plates; the superior pair of spinners are short and strong; the
inferior pair small, and in the ordinary position, but apparently not
(proportionally) so small as in the females of some other species.

A single adult male was received for examination from M. Eugène
Simon, by whom it was found at Digne (Basses Alpes, France). M. Simon
conjectures that it may be the male of _Nemesia Moggridgii_ (p. 273),
but some slight differences in the size and positions of the eyes,
and in the pattern on the cephalothorax, and on the under, as well
as the upper, side of the abdomen, lead me to believe that it is of
a different, and hitherto undescribed species, though probably very
closely allied to some others, especially to _Nemesia Manderstjernæ_
(_N. meridionalis_, Cambr., described, p. 283); in the present
species however the hind-lateral eyes are much larger in proportion
than in _N. Manderstjernæ_.

_Habitat._ Digne, Basses Alpes, France.


Nemesia dubia, sp. n., Plate XIX., fig. E, p. 229.

Syn. _Nemesia cæmentaria_, Simon, _Aranéides nouv. ou peu connus du
Midi de l'Europe_, Mém. Liège, 1873 (separate copy), p. 24.

Adult male, length 5-1/2 lines to 6 lines.

M. Eugène Simon (l.c.) describes, as _N. cæmentaria_, Latr., both
sexes of a spider found by himself in the Pyrenees and Spanish
mountain regions.

Languedoc and Provence are also given as localities, but it is not
clear that he has himself found it in these latter parts, certainly
not the male.

Two examples of this sex, found in the Pyrenees, and received from M.
Simon, are now before me; these correspond, so far, very exactly to
the description he gives (l.c.); the female I have not seen.

If the position assumed (p. 271) on Latreille's own authority, that
the true male of _N. cæmentaria_, Latr., (_N. carminans_, Latr.), has
a bifid point to the prolongation of the palpal bulb, it is clear
that the present species is distinct from that of Latreille.

M. Simon describes this palpal bulb as having its extreme point
"simple et plus effilée" (_i.e._ more slender than in the preceding
species he has described _N. meridionalis_). That the examples now
before me, agreeing exactly with this description, are not the males
of the species above described by myself as _N. cæmentaria_, Latr.,
from numerous females found at Montpellier, appears to me clear,
not only because I assume that of the true _N. cæmentaria_, Latr.,
males will be found to have the point of the palpal bulb bifid, but
because the position of the eyes is markedly different in M. Simon's
Pyrenean males and the Montpellier females. In the latter the eyes
of the front row are separated from each other by equal intervals,
in the former the interval between those of the central pair is
very perceptibly greater than that between each and the lateral of
the same row nearest to it. The interval also between each of the
fore-central eyes and the hind-central on its side is proportionally
much less.

It appears therefore necessary to characterize _N. cæmentaria_ (Sim.
l.c.) by some other name, for if eventually it should be found that
Latreille has erred in _N. carminans_ (with the _bifid point_ to the
palpal bulb) being the male of his _N. cæmentaria_, and that the
Montpellier species has a male with a _simple point_ to this part,
even then the present spider cannot retain its name (_cæmentaria_),
being distinct from the females found at Montpellier.

It is possible, of course, that the present species may hereafter
be found, perhaps abundantly, at Montpellier; in that case it
will have to be decided which of the two is most likely to be the
species described by Latreille. In that eventuality it seems to me
that the spider, above described from Montpellier, would be more
probably Latreille's species, for one of its specific characters is
a tolerably distinct and bold series of, not more than, five dark
angular bars along the middle of the upper side of the abdomen,
agreeing exactly with Dugès' figures in the _Règne Animal_ of Cuvier,
quoted above (p. 271); while in M. Simon's Pyrenean spider, the
abdominal pattern of the female described by him, does not agree
with this: "il est orné d'une fine ligne noire longitudinale, un peu
ondulée, présentant de nombreuses ramifications, s'étendant sur les
parties latérales" (l.c. p. 26). The males before me accord with
this description, though (as M. Simon also remarks) the "série de
fins accents bruns transverses" is "peu visibles et souvent effacés"
(l.c., p. 25); in one example this pattern is fairly distinct, in the
other it is scarcely recognisable.

The present is a larger spider than _N. incerta_ (the male found by
M. Simon at Digne); it is also less distinctly marked both on the
cephalothorax and abdomen. The position of the eyes is different,
and so also is the palpal bulb; in that species the spine describes
a simple curve with a strong outward direction; in the present it
is slightly but perceptibly _sinuous_, and its general direction is
_parallel to the radial joint of the palpus_; the spines also at the
upper fore extremity of the radial joint are 5-6 in number instead of
three. The outer side of the genual joint of each of the legs of the
third pair has three spines; that on the left side, however, of one
example, has four. The palpal bulb also appears to be proportionally
smaller than that of _N. dubia_, or of _N. Manderstjernæ_, Auss. (_N.
meridionalis_, Cambr.)

Another difference may here be noted between the present species and
the Montpellier _cæmentaria_. M. Simon (_in lit._) separates his _N.
cæmentaria_ from all others by the length of the patella and tibia
(genual and tibial joints) of the fourth pair of legs, exceeding in
length that of the cephalothorax and falces.

This character has not been found to exist in several females of the
Montpellier species, minutely measured by Mr. Moggridge; in them the
length of the cephalothorax and falces were found to exceed that of
the genual and tibial joints of the fourth pair of legs, by from
1-1/2 to 2 mm.

In regard to the relative length of the legs of the present species
this was 4, 1, 2, 3 in the one example examined, and 4, 1, 2-3 in the
other, both being males.

It is a matter of regret that nothing, as yet, has been accurately
observed in regard to the particular type or form of the nest of _N.
dubia_.

_Habitat._ Pyrenees and Spanish mountain regions.


Nemesia Manderstjernæ, Plate XX., fig. B, C, p. 254.

Syn. _Nemesia Manderstjernæ_, Auss. ♂, _Beitr. zur Kenntn. der
Arachn. Fam. der Territelariæ_, p. 54.

_Nemesia meridionalis_, Cambr. (female), _Harvesting Ants and
Trap-door Spiders_, by J. T. Moggridge, p. 101. Plates IX. X. XI.

Adult male, length 6-1/4 to 7-1/2 lines.

Since the publication of the description of _N. meridionalis_,
Cambr. (♀ l.c. _supra_), I have had an opportunity of examining an
adult example of each sex of a _Nemesia_, described about the same
time by M. Eugène Simon as _N. meridionalis_, Costa, in _Aranéides
nouv. ou peu connus du Midi de l'Europe_, p. 21 (separate copy).
The species described by M. Simon was found by himself abundantly
in Corsica. He also gives Italy and Provence as localities, but the
former of these two is, I conclude, given as being _Costa's_ locality
for the spider described by this latter author in _Fauna d. Regn.
Napl. Arachn._, p. 14; the other locality (Provence) would seem to
have been doubtfully given. On careful examination of the Corsican
examples (male and female), and on comparing them with the male and
female of _N. meridionalis_, Cambr., as well as the description and
figure given by Costa, I feel no doubt but that M. Simon is right in
according to the Corsican species M. Costa's name--_meridionalis_. It
agrees, I think, decidedly better, on the whole, with Costa's figure
and description than the species to which (l.c.) I had allotted the
specific name _meridionalis_ conferred by that author. Nor had I any
hesitation in accepting the determination made by M. Simon, in _Bull.
Ent. Soc. Fr._, 1873, sér. v. tom. 3, c.; that my _N. meridionalis_
♀ is the female of _N. Manderstjernæ_, Auss., the more especially
as since the publication of my description I have received from the
same locality (Mentone) not only the male of the spider described by
myself (l.c.), but also the type of M. Ausserer's description of _N.
Manderstjernæ_ (found at Nice), and believe these to be identical in
species. There is, indeed, a difference in the, apparent, relative
positions and colour of the eyes of the two spiders, but no more than
may be well accounted for by the condition of M. Ausserer's type
(most kindly lent to me for examination by its owner, Dr. Ludwig
Koch); this example is much shrunken, having the appearance of having
been allowed to get dry and then to have been again immersed in
spirit. This would (I have frequently found it so in other spiders)
cause even the hard integument of the cephalothorax to contract,
and so cause the eyes to shrink up together into a closer group, as
well as to sink down into the cuticle, making some of them appear
smaller than they really are. Alternate drying and wetting again in
spirit would also account for the yellowish brown colour of the eyes,
whereas in the male of the Mentone spider the eyes of the hinder
row are pearly grey, and of the front row dark grey. Beyond these
differences I can find no distinction between them.

The male of the present species is very nearly allied to both _N.
incerta_ (p. 276) from the Pyrenees, and _N. dubia_ (p. 280) from
Digne, of both of which, as remarked (l.c.), the male sex alone
is known to me; it is, however, larger than either, more richly
coloured, and more distinctly marked. In all three species the
elongated portion of the palpal bulb has a simple point, but in
the present spider it is not drawn out so finely and gradually:
some portion of its extremity being, though very fine yet really,
cylindrical, and not tapering off into a hair-like termination; the
general direction of the palpal bulb is parallel with the radial
joint, but the point which is equally curved is directed outwards
and a little downwards; the radial joint has four spines at the
fore extremity on the upper side (in one of the examples there were
however seven on the radial joint of the right palpus), and the
genual joint of each leg of the third pair, in both examples from
Mentone as well as in M. Ausserer's example from Nice, has three
spines on its outer side. This character was not remarked upon in
the description of _N. meridionalis_ ♀ (Cambr. l.c.). It is not
invariable in a long series of female examples; occasionally one
is found with four spines on one of these genual joints, in others
there is occasionally but one spine and sometimes (but rarely)
none; perhaps in this case broken off? I am inclined to attach
some importance as a specific character to the number, presence,
or absence of these spines on the outer side of the genual joint
of the third pair of legs; not that it is an invariable character,
few, if any, specific characters are absolute and invariable, nor
that it is of more importance than the armature of other portions
of the different legs, but as being more easily observed and less
liable to injury than the larger and more numerous spines on other
parts. Equally useful in specific determination are the spines at the
fore-extremity on the upper side of the radial joint of the palpus.
This, however, applies only to the male, whereas the character
derived from the spines on the genual joints of the third pair of
legs applies to both sexes.

Another character by which the present species (♀) may be
distinguished from _N. dubia_ (_N. cæmentaria_, Sim.) is that the
former is rather narrower at the fore-extremity of the caput, which
is also less elevated, being almost equally level with the thorax.

The description of the female given (l.c. _supra_) needs but little
addition. It may be noticed, however, that the central longitudinal
tapering orange band on the caput is faintly continued to the extreme
hinder margin of the thorax, and the thoracic fovea is rather sharply
curved. The intervals between the eyes is the same as in those of _N.
Moggridgii_, though their absolute size in some examples appeared to
be smaller. In both sexes there are several small, black, tooth-like,
tubercular spines on the inner side of the base of each maxilla, but
none at the apex of the labium.

The colour of the _cephalothorax_ in the male is bright-reddish
orange-yellow; a large portion of the sides of the caput, and the
ocular area also, is black-brown; the middle of the thorax is
distinctly marked with black-brown lines radiating to the thoracic
fovea.

Other, less deep, brown markings are mixed with these radiating
lines; there are a few prominent bristles in front of the ocular
area, a single longitudinal line of erect bristles along the middle
of the orange band from the eyes to the thoracic fovea, and the whole
cephalothorax is more or less clothed with greyish-yellow adpressed
hairs.

The _falces_ are of a deep blackish red-brown colour, longitudinally
striped with yellow-greyish hairs mixed with dark bristles; and there
are some strong spines at the fore extremity on the inner side.

The _abdomen_ is oval, tolerably convex above, of a dull, pale,
straw colour, suffused with brown at its fore extremity, whence an
indistinct central longitudinal band tapers to a point rather more
than half way to the spinners; on either side of this band are some
oblique, lateral, brown lines, which become broken chevrons, between
the termination of the central band and the spinners. The sides are
obscurely and irregularly marked with brown, and the under side is
of a uniform dull straw-yellow; the abdomen is clothed thickly with
mixed yellow-grey and dark hairs; the upper side is furnished also
with strong, nearly erect bristly black ones.

Each _tarsus_ terminates with three claws; those of the superior pair
are pectinated beneath, but the number of teeth appears to vary in
the different legs, from six to eight. The tibial joint of the first
pair is of the same character as that in the males of other species:
it has a strong black curved spine directed inwards from the fore
extremity of the under side, and a short bluntish-conical, but very
distinct prominence at the same extremity on the inner side, not far
from the base of the curved spine, Plate XX., fig. B 4 and C; the
colour of the legs is yellow, tinged with orange, the upper sides of
the femora being nearly black; the palpi are similar in colour, the
upper side of the humeral joints being suffused with a blackish hue.

The relative length of the legs is not constant; in one example it
was 4, 3, 1, 2, in the other 4, 1, 2, 3, 2 and 3 being very nearly
equal. Similar variations are also found in the legs of the female.

In regard to the nest of this species, researches made subsequently
to the publication of _Harvesting Ants and Trap-door Spiders_
have proved it to be of rather a different form from that there
represented; thus in the main tube, just before the inner door is
reached, there is a descending branch running off from the main
tube at the same angle as the ascending branch, but in an opposite
direction; in the older and larger nests the descending branch
becomes choked with débris; it is more distinct in the nests of the
younger spiders, and is always more or less distinctly traceable.

_N.B._--In the above details there have been only one or two special
distinctions observed between the two male examples examined. It
should however be noted that in one (the one captured behind a stone
wall) the ocular area was slightly narrower in proportion to its
length, and the interval between the eyes of each lateral pair rather
less.

_Habitat._ San Remo, Bordighera, Mentone, Cannes, and Hyères.


Nemesia Meridionalis, Plate XVII., fig. B, p. 215.

Syn. _Nemesia meridionalis_, Costa, _Fauna d. Regn. Napl. Arachn._,
p. 14, Pl. I., figs. 2, 3.

---- ---- Simon, _Aranéides nouv. ou peu connus du Midi de l'
Europe_, Mém. Liège, 1873 (separate copy), p. 21.

Adult male, length 6-3/4 lines (14 mm.), female adult, length 10-1/2
lines (22 mm.).

The examination of an adult example of each sex of this spider
received from M. Simon, by whom they were found in Corsica, leads
me to conclude that we have here the true _N. meridionalis_, Costa,
as certainly at least as it is possible at present to identify the
species by the insufficient description and figures given by this
author.

The _eyes_ appear to be less closely massed together than in _N.
Manderstjernæ_, but in other respects no particularly tangible
difference is to be noted; the interval however between the eyes of
each lateral pair is perhaps rather greater. Between the male and the
female of the present species there is a decided difference in the
relative position of the eyes. In the female the fore-centrals are
nearer together than each is to the fore-lateral on its side, while
in the male, the fore-centrals are wider apart than each is from its
fore-lateral. I have also noted a similar difference in regard to _N.
Manderstjernæ_. The fore-centrals are also smaller in the female than
in the male.

The two species, although bearing such great general similarity to
each other, may be at once distinguished by several very tangible
differences. First in regard to the _male_. The _cephalothorax_ of
_N. meridionalis_ has the whole caput of an almost uniform dark brown
colour, two slender yellow lines beginning, one a little way behind
each lateral pair of eyes, and converging rather quickly towards each
other, run on nearly parallel, but in close proximity together to
the thoracic fovea. The centre of the thorax is also dark brown, the
brown portion formed by radiating confluent patches, rather than by
distinct lines as in _Manderstjernæ_. The curve of the thoracic fovea
is sharp, in fact more in the form of a straight line with the ends
bent down.

The _cephalothorax_ is of nearly one uniform level and convexity
above; the caput being a little more rounded than the thorax; the
eye eminence seemed to be rather higher than in _N. Manderstjernæ_,
and the _clypeus_, which is steepish, is impressed in the middle and
exceeds in height half that of the facial space; on the lower margin
of the _clypeus_ is a transverse row of several strong prominent
bristles. There were no bristles behind the eyes, and no appearance
of any having been broken off there (the female, however, has a
single longitudinal row on the caput). The lateral and hinder margins
of the cephalothorax, however, are, in the male (but not in the
female) clothed with black bristles and bristly hairs.

The _palpi_ are longer than in _Manderstjernæ_. The radial joints
have, at the upper fore extremity of each, five spines, _three_ in
front in a transverse line, and _two_ immediately behind them. The
palpal bulb is more globular, and the spiny production, which is not
very long, springs from it more suddenly, and is _strongly sinuous_,
its sharp tapering point directed outwards. The strong sinuosity of
this part distinguishes it at once both from _N. Manderstjernæ_ and
all other known European males with a simple point to the palpal
organs.

The _legs_ are longish and strong; their relative length 4-1, 3, 2
(male); 4-1, 2, 3 (female); they are furnished with hairs, bristles,
and spines. These do not appear to call for special notice, except
that each genual joint of those of the third pair has two spines on
its outer side in both sexes.

The superior tarsal claws are denticulated, but the denticulations
differ in number and strength, not only in the two sexes and in the
different legs, but in some instances in the two superior claws of
the same leg. The denticulations seemed to be more numerous in the
female than in the male.

The _abdomen_ is elongate oval, and of a straw yellow colour. In
the _male_ the fore part of the upper side is irregularly black
brown, followed by an irregular somewhat broken longitudinal central
bar, and some broken oblique lines and portions of chevrons. In
the _female_ the fore part is less densely blackish, the central
longitudinal line is obscure, but the oblique lateral lines are more
distinct and less broken, but none are quite united so as to form
chevrons, though the two or three nearest to the spinners almost do
so.

The upper side is furnished with numerous strong nearly erect black
bristles.

The _labium_ has a row, of bristles only, at its apex.

The markings of the cephalothorax in the female are very nearly like
those of that sex in _N. Manderstjernæ_; the tapering orange yellow
band, however, behind the eyes appears to be rather bolder, as in
that species this band also is faintly traceable quite to the hinder
thoracic margin. The inner corner of the base of the maxillæ, in both
sexes, has several minute tooth-like black spines.

The form of the cephalothorax in the female differs from that of
the male; in the latter sex (male) it is narrower before and rather
rounded behind; in the former sex (female) it is broadest before and
more distinctly hollow-truncate behind; the caput is also rounder and
more elevated. In the female the tarsi and metatarsi of the two first
pairs of legs have close set brush-like hairs beneath; these are
wanting in the two hinder pairs, and also almost entirely wanting on
the two first pairs in the male.

Various other characters, both peculiar and differential, are noted
in regard to this species by M. Simon (l.c.). It is to be regretted
that this painstaking observer did not note more exactly the form and
type of its nest; from his description of it, however, it appears to
be branched, but whether the door is of the wafer or cork type, or
whether it has an inner door or not, is not mentioned.

_Habitat._ Corsica.


Nemesia Congener, sp. n., Plate XVIII., fig. A, p. 225.

Adult female, length 9 lines (19 mm.).

In general appearance, colours, and markings this spider bears
great resemblance to _N. cæmentaria_. The eyes, however, appeared
to be smaller, and the hind-centrals also smaller in proportion to
the rest. The pale margins of the cephalothorax are in the present
species generally confined to some rather indistinct pale patches.

The central orange band from the eyes to the thoracic fovea is,
especially in immature examples, often only a simple tapering line;
in others it is larger, and often composed of three converging narrow
orange bands, which form, in some examples, a broad central tapering
band, marked with two longitudinal dark lines. The thoracic fovea is
curved, but not sharply.

The _abdomen_ is broadish oval, of a dull clay colour, marked with
dark brown lines, and markings on the sides and upper side. In
some examples these form a longitudinal central series of curved
or slightly angular lines; in others but little trace of regular
chevrons can be seen.

In the present spider there is also a longitudinal pale yellowish
patch on the inner upper margin of the falces near their base; they
are furnished with hairs in longitudinal bands, and spines, like
others of the genus.

The _legs_ are moderately long, strong, and furnished with hairs and
bristles, and, sparingly, with spines. The genual joints of the third
pair have some spines on the outer side, varying from one to three in
different examples. The tarsi and metatarsi of the first and second
pairs, as well as the radial and digital joints of the palpi, have
strong lateral brush-like fringes of close-set sooty black hairs. The
superior pair of tarsal claws are denticulated, but not uniformly
either in strength, number, or position.

No doubt this will prove a very troublesome spider to distinguish
with certainty from _N. cæmentaria_, but the almost constant presence
of a spine or spines on the outer face of the genual joint of the
third pair of legs seems to be a good distinguishing character; in
no one example out of nine carefully examined could I detect their
absence altogether, while a single spine even on _N. cæmentaria_ is
rare.

In the present species five examples had three spines on each of
these joints; two had two spines on each; one had a single spine on
each; another had one on one side, two on the other.

The nest, however, is very characteristic and peculiar. It is of the
wafer-lid type, and so cannot, from even the outside, be mistaken
for that of _N. cæmentaria_, which is of the cork-lid type; it is,
moreover, branched below, while that of _N. cæmentaria_ is a single
unbranched tube. It has also an inside door, or valve, of very
remarkable construction, having two perfect cork-like faces, securely
shutting off either the branch, or the main tube just above the
branch, at pleasure. By this latter character it is distinguished
also from the tube of _N. Manderstjernæ_, as well as by the absence
of a second short branch or cavity, lately discovered in the nest
of this last spider. Examples of this spider were found, not
unfrequently, but invariably in such nests as that above described,
at Hyères.

The female sex only has yet been met with.

_Habitat._ Hyères.


Nemesia Suffusa, sp. n., Plate XVII., fig. A, p. 215.

Immature female, length 7-1/2 lines (15-1/2 mm.).

Although no example was quite adult, this species may readily be
distinguished from all others yet known to me, by its more elongated
form, particularly the cylindrico-ovate form of the abdomen.

The _cephalothorax_ is oval, broadest towards its posterior
extremity, where it is rounded, the fore-margin being truncated; the
caput is well rounded and convex, and the thorax perhaps more so
than in other species, so that when looked at in profile there is a
considerable dip or hollow at the thoracic fovea; this fovea forms a
slight curve. Except that the lateral margins are rather broadly pale
towards the hinder part (though the pale portion is ill-defined),
the whole of the cephalothorax is of a uniform dull yellowish-brown
colour; the extreme lateral margin is marked by a black line, and
in one or two examples there was an indistinct yellowish central
longitudinal line from the eyes to the thoracic junction, having a
single row of prominent bristles upon it. The whole surface of the
cephalothorax is fairly clothed with dusky yellowish-grey adpressed
hairs: the ordinary grooves and indentations are well marked.

The _eyes_ are on the usual eye eminence, which is perhaps rather
more elevated than ordinary, and its summit black; their position
is ordinary. It may, however, be noticed that the fore-centrals are
placed more forward than in most of the other known species; the
fore-centrals are about _equally_ separated from each other, and
from the fore-laterals nearest to each respectively; they are also
separated from the hind-central nearest to each, by an interval
not differing much from that between each other; the hind-centrals
are distinctly oval, or rather somewhat semilunar in form, smallest
of the eight (except in one example, when they were almost, if not
quite, as large as the fore-centrals), and at their hindermost point
very near, but not quite contiguous, to the hind-laterals. The eyes
of each lateral pair (of which the hinder is very nearly equal in
size to the fore one), are very near, but not quite contiguous, to
each other; the interval between them is narrower than that between
the corresponding eyes in almost any other yet described species.

The _legs_ are neither long nor very strong; their relative length is
4, 1, 2, 3, though between 2 and 3 there is in different examples the
same variation observed in other species; sometimes they are equal,
and sometimes one, and then the other, very slightly the longest:
their colour is pale yellowish, and they are furnished with hairs,
bristles, and spines, but the latter are not numerous, and appeared
to be both longer and slenderer than usual; the genual joints of the
third pair have spines, from one to three on the outer side, for the
most part, three; the superior tarsal claws are pectinated (but not
uniformly on all the legs) beneath their hinder portion.

The _falces_ are strong, and similar in colour to the cephalothorax,
but they do not appear to call for any special remark.

The _maxillæ_ have a few minute tuberculiform black teeth at their
base on the inner side, and, with the _labium_ (which has no hairs at
its apex) and _sternum_, are similar in colour to the legs.

The _abdomen_ is of an elongated, or cylindrico-ovate form, of a
dull drab-yellowish colour, with a central, longitudinal, irregular,
rather chocolate-brown bar on its upper side, and 6 to 7 well-defined
lateral oblique slightly curved lines of the same colour and touching
the central line; between these lines are some other irregular, but
similarly coloured, markings.

The sides are almost immaculate, and the underside quite so; the
spinners are ordinary.

About 10 examples (all immature) were found at Montpellier in
branched tubes closed at the entrance with a wafer-lid. The branch
arises some way below the entrance and runs up to the surface at an
acute angle with the main tube; there is no lower door, and thus this
tube forms the type of a new form of nest, being branched, with a
wafer-lid, but without a lower door.

This species cannot be confused with _N. cæmentaria_, which is found
abundantly in the same locality; both the general form, colours,
markings, and nest readily distinguish it from that species.

_Habitat._ Montpellier.


Nemesia Simoni, sp. n., Plate XVI., fig. A, p. 211.

Adult female, length rather more than 9-1/4 lines (20 mm.).

This spider is of a proportionally broader and stouter form than
others of the genus _Nemesia_, and the cephalothorax (which is
entirely glabrous and destitute of adpressed hairs) has the caput
more rounded and elevated than in any other species of _Nemesia_
known to me, approaching _Cteniza_ in these respects.

The _cephalothorax_ is oval, truncate, and about equally broad at
each end; the ordinary grooves and indentations are strong; besides
the groove which indicates its union with the thorax, the caput has
an indented or pinched-in appearance towards its hinder part on each
side. Except that this was present in all the examples examined (ten)
it might have been taken to be accidental.

The colour of the cephalothorax is dark brown tinged with yellow,
darkest on the sides of the caput, which is divided longitudinally
by a narrow, dull, orange-yellow line, and lightest on the margins
towards the hinder part; the thoracic fovea is curved, but more
deeply indented and the indentation is wider at each end than in
other species, the ends being a little turned back: there is a single
longitudinal row of long erect bristles along the central line of the
caput, and a few more on the lower margin of the clypeus.

The _eyes_ form a narrower oblong area than usual, owing chiefly
to their small size and to those of each lateral pair being almost
contiguous to each other, separated only by an interval equal to that
which divides each hind-lateral from the hind-central nearest to it.
The hind-centrals are smallest of the eight, and vary in form, being
round, semilunar, or roughly wedge-shaped, differing at times in the
same example. The eye eminence is less elevated than in most species,
and this brings the fore-centrals nearer to the straight line of the
fore-laterals; these last are the largest of the eight. The height of
the clypeus exceeds half that of the facial space.

The _legs_ are short and strong; their relative length 4, 1, 3, 2,
or 4, 1, 2, 3, or 4, 1, 2-3; they are of a brownish yellow colour,
deeper on their fore-sides, furnished with hairs, bristles, and
spines, the latter not very numerous nor unusually strong; there
are no spines on the outer sides of the genual joints of the third
pair; the tarsal claws are longish and strong. Those of the superior
pair have but one, two, or three pectinations on their underside; on
some of the legs I could not detect any. There seemed to be no more
uniformity in the tarsal-claw pectinations in this species than in
others. The tarsal and metatarsal joints of the legs of the first
pair have a fringe of close-set short blackish hairs on either side,
as also have the digital joints of the palpi, these being similar to
the legs in colour and armature; the humeral joints are very deep but
narrow, being apparently bent and hollowed on their inner sides to
allow of meeting well over the falces.

The terminal palpal claw has two teeth towards its base on the
underside. I could not ascertain satisfactorily whether this is
or not a uniform character in all examples; in one example these
denticulations were very plain, but they seemed to be wanting in
others.

The _falces_ are very strong and massive, round in their profile,
and very roundly prominent near their base on the upper side. They
are of a rich deep black-brown colour, glossy, and furnished along
their inner margins with black bristles and hairs, and with strong
spines at their extremity on the upper side. The fang is strong, and
the outer margin of the groove in which it lies when at rest has some
strong teeth.

The _maxillæ_ are strong, of normal form, but very convex on their
outer surface.

The small tuberculous teeth noticed at the base on the inner side of
the maxillæ of all the other species I have examined, were visible
(though with difficulty) in this species also.

The _labium_ is broader than it is high, convex on its face, and
rounded at the apex; it is (as also are the _maxillæ_ and _sternum_)
of the same colour as the legs, and clothed with numerous strong
bristly hairs.

The _abdomen_ is short-oval, and strongly convex above; it is of a
dull clay-coloured brown tinged with chocolate, and along the centre
of its upper side is a series of six strong angular bars or chevrons
of a dark chocolate-brown colour, and pretty distinctly defined,
though, when examined closely, broken in parts.

The intervening spaces between the angular bars and the sides have a
few irregular markings of a similar colour; and they are connected
by a longitudinal central line of the same hue running through their
apices.

The abdomen is very sparingly clothed with hairs and fine bristles;
the superior pair of spinners are strong; those of the inferior pair
very small and short.

Examples of this fine and very distinct spider were found at Bordeaux
in simple unbranched tubes, covered with a wafer-lid, running down
very deep into the earth, in some cases as much as fifteen inches
into an exceedingly hard soil, making it a work of great labour and
care to get them out without injury.

This species can scarcely be confused with any other yet known; its
short robust form, short legs, more elevated caput, general dark
colour, distinct angular bars on the abdomen, and almost contiguous
lateral eyes, as well as the form of the nest, will readily
distinguish it.

It is with great pleasure that I connect with this spider the name of
my most kind friend and brother arachnologist, Monsieur Eugène Simon,
to whom I am so greatly indebted for much information and numerous
examples of rare spiders.

I must not conclude these descriptions without expressing my sense of
obligation to Mr. Moggridge for so kindly allowing me to add them to
the far more popular, and more interesting, portion of this volume,
in which the _habits_ of these spiders are recorded.

Descriptions of _colour_, _form_, and _structure_ are but dry
details, though very necessary for the determination of species; and
in the present case it is very important as well as interesting to be
able to conclude with some certainty that differences of type in the
tubular nests of the spiders Mr. Moggridge has observed so closely
and accurately, are joined to well-marked specific differences
obtained from those other characters above mentioned, and which it
has been my endeavour to detail as fully and faithfully as possible.




INDEX TO SUPPLEMENT.


PART I.--HARVESTING ANTS.

  Alyssocarpus, seeds of, collected by ants, 175
  Amphisbæna, found in nests of Lauba ants, 177
  _André_ (M. Ernest), on number of species of ants found in Europe,
   160 (note)
  _Arabia_, custom in, relative to ants, 176
  Atta, species of, found in Europe, 160 (note);
    _barbara_, 158;
    found in Palestine, 165;
    _megacephala_, 160;
    _structor_, 158;
    experiment with, 172;
    found harvesting at Cadenabbia, 159

  _Cadenabbia_, harvesting ants at, 159
  Camponotus _sylvatica_, 178
  Cicendela, capturing ants, 164
  Coluocera _attæ_, found in ants' nests, 177
  _Cricket_ (Gryllus _myrmecophilus_), found in ants' nests, 178

  _England_, do ants harvest in, 159 (note)

  _Formic acid_, experiments with, 173
  Formica _erratica_, 164;
    _nigra_, collecting violet seeds, 159 (note)

  Gryllus _myrmecophilus_, found in ants' nests, 178

  _Hindoos_, custom of scattering rice for ants, 176

  _India_, observations in, 175
  _Insects_ found in ants' nests, 177

  _Jews_, laws treating of rights over ants' stores, 165

  _King_ (Dr.), observations in India, 175

  _Lizards_ capturing ants, 162

  _Misna_, allusion to harvesting ants in, 165
  _Montpellier_, harvesting ants at, 160

  _Nests_, quantity of seeds contained in, 170

  _Palestine_, harvesting ants in, 165
  Pheidole _megacephala_, 160
  Pterocles _exustus_, feeding on seeds collected by ants, 175

  _Robin_ eating ants, 163 (note)

  _Seed-stores_ of ants, Jewish laws about, 165
  _Seeds_, intervention of ants necessary to prevent germination of, 172;
    non-germination of in granaries, 171

  _Wakefield_ (Mr.), on ants collecting violet seeds, 159 (note)


PART II.--TRAP-DOOR SPIDERS.

  _Ants_ form a large part of food of trap-door spiders, 237
  Atypus _bleodonticus_ (Sim.), 183 (note);
    _piceus_ (Sulzer), nests of, 182-3, 248;
    species of in England, 181, 185
  _Australia_, nest of wafer type from, 217

  _Bates_ (Mr. H. W.), on the nest of _Theraphosa Blondii_, 188
  _Beetle_ (Chrysomela _Banksii_) rejected by trap-door spider, 241
  _Blackwall_ (Mr. J.), on the poison of spiders, 201
  _Bordeaux_, new type of nest at, 211
  _Brown_ (Mr. Joshua), discovery of _Atypus_ in England, 185

  _California_, trap-door spider from, 198-9;
    habits of in captivity, 203, &c.;
    indifference to sounds, 206
  _Captive spiders_, habits of, 203, 218, 242-6
  _Caterpillar_ (larva of Cucullia _verbasci_), eaten by trap-door
   spider, 239
  _Cell and tube_ made by _N. Eleanora_, 218;
    hygrometricity of, 220
  _Chrysomela Banksii_, distasteful to trap-door spider, 241
  _Cork nest_, 193;
    structure of door of, 193
  Cteniza _californica_ (Camb.), 198, 202, 248;
    description of, 260;
    eggs laid by, 203;
    habits of in captivity, 203, &c.;
    indifference to sounds, 206;
    mode of excavating, 208;
    _fodiens_ (Walck.), 195, 248, 259;
    _ionica_, 210;
    _Moggridgii_ (Camb.), 196;
    description of, 254;
    habits of in captivity, 243, 246
  Cucullia _verbasci_, larva of, eaten by trap-door spider, 239
  Cyrtauchenius _elongatus_ (Sim.), nest of, 189, 248

  _Diagrams_ representing different types of nest, 193

  _Earwig_ (_Forficula_) eaten by trap-door spiders, 238
  _Eggs of_ Cteniza _californica_, 203
  _Enemies of spiders_, 200, 205
  _Enlargement of nests_, 245
  _Excavation_ of trap-door nests, 208, 243-4

  _Food of trap-door spiders_, 237-9, 241;
    mode of procuring, 238
  _Funnel type_ of nest, constructed by _Cyrtauchenius elongatus_, 189

  _Geographical distribution_, 247-9, 250

  _Hyères_ double-door, branched wafer type, 223

  Idioctis _helva_ (L. Koch), nest of, 217

  _Koch_ (Dr. L.), on nest of _Idioctis helva_ from Australia, 217

  _Lanzwert_ (Dr.), on trap-door spiders in California, 199
  _Latreille_ (P. A.), on the nest of Lycosa _tarentula_, 236
  Lycosa _tarentula_, nests of at Cannes, 233;
    nests closed in the winter, 235

  _Montpellier_, Nemesia _cæmentaria_ at, 196, 198;
    _N. suffusa_ at, 215

  Nemesia _cæmentaria_ (Latr.), 195-6, 249;
    description of, 264;
    _congener_ (Camb.), 224, 249;
      description of, 292;
    _dubia_ (Camb.), description of, 280;
    _Eleanora_ (Camb.), 218, 249, 272;
    _incerta_ (Camb.), description of, 276;
    _Manderstjernæ_ (Auss.), 226, 249;
      description of, 283;
    _meridionalis_ (Costa), 227, 250;
      description of, 289;
    _Moggridgii_ (Camb.), 197-8, 249;
      description of, 273;
    _Simoni_ (Camb.), 211, 249;
      description of, 297;
    _suffusa_ (Camb.), 215, 249;
      description of, 295
  _Nests enlarged_, not deserted, 245
  _Nocturnal habits_ of trap-door spiders, 240

  _Oniscus_ (wood-louse) eaten by trap-door spider, 241

  _Poison_ of spiders, 200-1

  _Simon_ (M. E.), on _Atypus piceus_ (Sulzer), 182;
    on Cyrtauchenius _elongatus_ (Sim.), 189

  _Tarantula_, 233, 235
  _Theraphosa Blondii_, nest of, 188

  _Wafer nests_ of single-door unbranched type, 193 (note), 211;
    of single-door branched type, 193, 214;
    of double-door unbranched type, 193, 218;
    of Hyères double-door branched type, 193, 223;
    of double-door branched cavity type, 193, 228
  _Wood-louse_ (Oniscus) eaten by trap-door spider, 241
  _Worms_ the food of _Atypus_, 182, 186


THE END.


LIST OF WORKS

PUBLISHED BY

L. REEVE & CO.,

5, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, W.C.

=NEW SERIES OF NATURAL HISTORY FOR BEGINNERS.=


∵ A good introductory series of books on Natural History for the
use of students and amateurs is still a _desideratum_. Those at
present in use have been too much compiled from antiquated sources;
whilst the figures, copied in many instances from sources equally
antiquated, are far from accurate, the colouring of them having
become degenerated through the adoption, for the sake of cheapness,
of mechanical processes.

The present series will be entirely the result of original research
carried to its most advanced point; and the figures, which will be
chiefly engraved on steel, by the artist most highly renowned in each
department for his technical knowledge of the subjects, will in all
cases be drawn from actual specimens, and coloured separately by hand.

Each work will treat of a department of Natural History sufficiently
limited in extent to admit of a satisfactory degree of completeness.


_The following are now ready_:--

  British Insects; a Familiar Description of the Form, Structure,
      Habits, and Transformations of Insects. By E. F. Staveley.
      Crown 8vo, 16 Coloured Steel Plates, engraved from Natural
      Specimens expressly for the work by E. W. Robinson, and
      numerous Wood-Engravings by E. C. Rye, 14_s._

  British Butterflies and Moths; an Introduction to the Study of our
      Native Lepidoptera. By H. T. Stainton. Crown 8vo, 16 Coloured
      Steel Plates, containing Figures of 100 Species, engraved from
      Natural Specimens expressly for the work by E. W. Robinson, and
      Wood-Engravings, 10_s._ 6_d._

  British Beetles; an Introduction to the Study of our Indigenous
      Coleoptera. By E. C. Rye. Crown 8vo, 16 Coloured Steel Plates,
      comprising Figures of nearly 100 Species, engraved from Natural
      Specimens, expressly for the work, by E. W. Robinson, and 11
      Wood-Engravings of Dissections by the Author, 10_s._ 6_d._

  British Bees; an Introduction to the Study of the Natural History
      and Economy of the Bees indigenous to the British Isles. By W.
      E. Shuckard. Crown 8vo, 16 Coloured Steel Plates, containing
      nearly 100 Figures, engraved from Natural Specimens, expressly
      for the work, by E. W. Robinson, and Woodcuts of Dissections,
      10_s._ 6_d._

  British Spiders; an Introduction to the Study of the Araneidæ found
      in Great Britain and Ireland. By E. F. Staveley. Crown 8vo, 16
      Plates, containing Coloured Figures of nearly 100 Species, and
      40 Diagrams, showing the number and position of the eyes in
      various Genera, drawn expressly for the work by Tuffen West,
      and 44 Wood-Engravings, 10_s._ 6_d._

  British Grasses; an Introduction to the Study of the Grasses found
      in the British Isles. By M. Plues. Crown 8vo, 16 Coloured
      Plates, drawn expressly for the work by W. Fitch, and 100
      Wood-Engravings, 10_s._ 6_d._

  British Ferns; an Introduction to the Study of the Ferns, Lycopods,
      and Equiseta indigenous to the British Isles. With Chapters
      on the Structure, Propagation, Cultivation, Diseases, Uses,
      Preservation, and Distribution of Ferns. By M. Plues. Crown
      8vo, 16 Coloured Plates, drawn expressly for the work by W.
      Fitch, and 55 Wood-Engravings, 10_s._ 6_d._

  British Seaweeds; an Introduction to the Study of the Marine Algæ
      of Great Britain, Ireland, and the Channel Islands. By S. O.
      Gray. Crown 8vo, 16 Coloured Plates, drawn expressly for the
      work by W. Fitch, 10_s._ 6_d._


=Other Works in preparation.=


=BOTANY.=

  The Young Collector's Handybook of Botany. By the Rev. H. P.
      Dunster, M.A. 66 Wood-Engravings, 3_s._ 6_d._

  The Natural History of Plants. By H. Baillon, President of the
      Linnæan Society of Paris, Professor of Medical Natural History
      and Director of the Botanical Garden of the Faculty of Medicine
      of Paris. Translated by Marcus M. Hartog, B. Sc. Lond., Scholar
      of Trinity College, Cambridge. Super-royal 8vo. Vols. I. to
      III., with 1300 Wood-Engravings, 25_s._ each.

  Domestic Botany; an Exposition of the Structure and Classification
      of Plants, and of their uses for Food, Clothing, Medicine, and
      Manufacturing Purposes. By John Smith, A.L.S., ex-Curator of
      the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Crown 8vo, 16 Coloured Plates
      and Wood-Engravings, 16_s._

  Handbook of the British Flora; a Description of the Flowering
      Plants and Ferns indigenous to, or naturalized in, the British
      Isles. For the Use of Beginners and Amateurs, By George
      Bentham, F.R.S., President of the Linnæan Society. New Edition,
      Crown 8vo, 12_s._

  The Illustrated British Flora, a Description (with a
      Wood-Engraving, including dissections, of each species) of the
      Flowering Plants and Ferns indigenous to, or naturalized in,
      the British Isles. By George Bentham, F.R.S., President of the
      Linnæan Society. Demy 8vo, 2 vols., 1295 Wood-Engravings, from
      Original Drawings by W. Fitch, 35_s._

  British Wild Flowers, Familiarly Described in the Four Seasons.
      A New Edition of "The Field Botanist's Companion." By Thomas
      Moore, F.L.S. Demy 8vo, 24 Coloured Plates, by W. Fitch, 16_s._

  Outlines of Elementary Botany, as Introductory to Local Floras.
      By George Bentham, F.R.S., President of the Linnæan Society.
      Second Edition, 2_s._ 6_d._

  British Grasses; an Introduction to the Study of the Gramineæ of
      Great Britain and Ireland. By M. Plues. Crown 8vo, with 16
      Coloured Plates by W. Fitch, and 100 Wood-Engravings, 10_s._
      6_d._

  The Botanical Magazine: Figures and Descriptions of New and Rare
      Plants of Interest to the Botanical Student, and suitable
      for the Garden, Stove, or Greenhouse. By Dr. J. D. Hooker,
      C.B., F.R.S., Director of the Royal Gardens, Kew. Royal 8vo.
      Published Monthly, with 6 Plates, 3s. 6d. coloured. Annual
      Subscription, 42_s._

      Re-issue of the Third Series in monthly vols., 42_s._ each; to
        Subscribers for the entire series, 36_s._ each.

  The Floral Magazine New Series, enlarged to Royal 4to. Figures and
      Descriptions of the choicest New Flowers for the Garden, Stove,
      or Conservatory. Monthly, with 4 beautifully Coloured Plates,
      3_s._ 6_d._ Annual Subscription, 42_s._

      First Series complete in 10 vols., with 560 beautifully Coloured
        Plates, £18 7_s._ 6_d._

  Laws of Botanical Nomenclature adopted by the International
      Botanical Congress, with an Historical Introduction and a
      Commentary. By Alphonse de Candolle. 2_s._ 6_d._

  The Tourist's Flora; a Descriptive Catalogue of the Flowering
      Plants and Ferns of the British Islands, France, Germany,
      Switzerland, Italy, and the Italian Islands. By Joseph Woods,
      F.L.S. Demy 8vo, 18_s._

  Contributions to the Flora of Mentone, and to a Winter Flora of the
      Riviera, including the Coast from Marseilles to Genoa. By J.
      Traherne Moggridge, F.L.S. Royal 8vo. In 4 parts, each, with 25
      Coloured Plates, 15_s._, or complete in one vol., 63_s._

  Flora Vitiensis; a Description of the Plants of the Viti or
      Fiji Islands, with an Account of their History, Uses, and
      Properties. By Dr. Berthold Seeman, F.L.S. Royal 4to, Parts I.
      to IX. each, 10 Coloured Plates, 15_s._ Part X., 25_s._, or
      complete in one thick vol., cloth, £8 5_s._

  Flora of British India. By Dr. J. D. Hooker, C.B., F.R.S., &c.;
      assisted by various Botanists. Parts I. and II., each 10_s._
      6_d._ Published under the Authority of the Secretary of State
      for India in Council.

  Flora of Tropical Africa. By Daniel Oliver, F.R.S., F.L.S. Vols
      I. and II., 20_s._ each. Published under the authority of the
      First Commissioner of Her Majesty's Works.

  Handbook of the New Zealand Flora; a Systematic Description of the
      Native Plants of New Zealand, and the Chatham, Kermadec's, Lord
      Auckland's, Campbell's, and Macquarrie's Islands. By Dr. J. D.
      Hooker, F.R.S. Complete in one vol., 30_s._ Published under the
      auspices of the Government of that colony.

  Flora Australiensis; a Description of the Plants of the Australian
      Territory. By George Bentham, F.R.S., President of the Linnæan
      Society, assisted by Ferdinand Mueller, F.R.S., Government
      Botanist, Melbourne, Victoria. Vols. I. to VI., 20_s._ each.
      Published under the auspices of the several Governments of
      Australia.

  Flora of the British West Indian Islands. By Dr. Grisebach, F.L.S.
      37_s._ 6_d._ Published under the auspices of the Secretary of
      State for the Colonies.

  Flora Hongkongensis; a Description of the Flowering Plants and
      Ferns of the Island of Hongkong. By George Bentham, P.L.S. With
      a Map of the Island, and a Supplement by Dr. Hance. 18_s._
      Published under the authority of Her Majesty's Secretary of
      State for the Colonies. The Supplement separately, 2_s._ 6_d._

  Flora Capensis: a Systematic Description of the Plants of the Cape
      Colony, Caffraria, and Port Natal. By William H. Harvey, M.D.,
      F.R S., Professor of Botany in the University of Dublin, and
      Otto Wilhem Sonder, Ph.D. Vols. I and II., 12_s._ each. Vol.
      III., 18_s._

  Flora of Tasmania. By Dr. J. D. Hooker, F.R.S. 2 vols. Royal 4to.
      200 Plates, £17 10_s._, coloured. Published under the authority
      of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty.

  On the Flora of Australia, its Origin, Affinities, and
      Distribution; being an Introductory Essay to the "Flora of
      Tasmania." By Dr. J. D. Hooker, F.R.S., 10_s._

  Genera Plantarum, ad Exemplaria imprimis in Herbariis Kewensibus
      servata definita. By George Bentham, F.R.S., President of the
      Linnæan Society, and Dr. J. D. Hooker, F.R.S., Director of the
      Royal Gardens, Kew. Vol. I. Part I. Royal 8vo, 21_s._ Part II.,
      14_s._; Part III, 15_s._; or Vol. I. complete, 50_s._ Part IV.
      (being Vol. II. Part I.) 24_s._

  Illustrations of the Genus Carex. By Francis Boott, M.D. Folio, 600
      Plates. Part I., 10_l._ Parts II. and III., each 5_l._ Part
      IV., 10_l._

  Illustrations of the Nueva Quinologia of Pavon, with Observations
      on the Barks described. By J. E. Howard, F.L.S. With 27
      coloured Plates by W. Fitch. Imperial folio, half-morocco, gilt
      edges, 6_l._ 6_s._

  The Quinology of the East Indian Plantations. By J. E. Howard,
      F.L.S. Folio, 3 Coloured Plates, 21_s._

  Revision of the Natural Order Hederaceæ, being a reprint, with
      numerous additions and corrections, of a series of papers
      published in the "Journal of Botany, British and Foreign." By
      Berthold Seemann, Ph.D., F.L.S. 7 Plates, 10_s._ 6_d._

  Icones Plantarum. Figures, with Brief Descriptive Characters and
      Remarks, of New and Rare Plants, selected from the Author's
      Herbarium. By Sir W. J. Hooker, F.R.S. New Series, Vol. V. 100
      Plates, 31_s._ 6_d._

  Orchids: and How to Grow them in India and other Tropical Climates.
      By Samuel Jennings, F.L.S., F.R.H.S., late Vice-President of
      the Agri-Horticultural Society of India. Royal 4to. In Monthly
      Parts, with 4 Coloured Plates, 5_s._ each.

  A Second Century of Orchidaceous Plants, selected from the
      Subjects published in Curtis's "Botanical Magazine" since the
      issue of the "First Century." Edited by James Bateman, Esq.,
      F.R.S. Complete in 1 Vol. royal 4to, 100 Coloured Plates, 5_l._
      5_s._

  Monograph of Odontoglossum, a Genus of the Vandeous Section of
      Orchidaceous Plants. By James Bateman, Esq., F.R.S. Imperial
      folio, complete in 6 Parts, each with 5 Coloured Plates, and
      occasional Wood-Engravings, 21_s._, or in one vol., half
      morocco, gilt edges, 7_l._ 7_s._

  Select Orchidaceous Plants. By Robert Warner, F.R.H.S. With Notes
      on Culture by B. S. Williams. Folio, cloth gilt, 6_l._ 6_s._

      Second Series, Parts I. to X., each, with 3 Coloured Plates,
        10_s._ 6_d._

  The Rhododendrons of Sikkim-Himalaya; being an Account, Botanical
      and Geographical, of the Rhododendrons recently discovered in
      the Mountains of Eastern Himalaya, by Dr. J. D. Hooker, F.R.S.
      By Sir W. J. Hooker, F.R.S. Folio, 30 Coloured Plates, 4_l._
      14_s._ 6_d._


=FERNS.=

  British Ferns; an Introduction to the Study of the Ferns,
      Lycopods, and Equiseta indigenous to the British Isles.
      With Chapters on the Structure, Propagation, Cultivation,
      Diseases, Uses, Preservation, and Distribution of Ferns. By M.
      Plues. Crown 8vo, with 16 Coloured Plates by W. Fitch, and 55
      Wood-Engravings, 10_s._ 6_d._

  The British Ferns; Coloured Figures and Descriptions, with Analysis
      of the Fructification and Venation of the Ferns of Great
      Britain and Ireland. By Sir W. J. Hooker, F.R.S. Royal 8vo, 66
      Coloured Plates, 2_l._ 2_s._

  Garden Ferns; Coloured Figures and Descriptions, with Analysis
      of the Fructification and Venation, of a Selection of Exotic
      Ferns, adapted for Cultivation in the Garden, Hothouse, and
      Conservatory. By Sir W. J. Hooker, F.R.S. Royal 8vo, 64
      Coloured Plates, 2_l._ 2_s._

  Filices Exoticæ; Coloured Figures and Description of Exotic Ferns.
      By Sir W. J. Hooker, F.R.S. Royal 4to, 100 Coloured Plates,
      6_l._ 11_s._

  Ferny Combes; a Ramble after Ferns in the Glens and Valleys of
      Devonshire. By Charlotte Chanter. _Third Edition_. Fcap. 8vo, 8
      Coloured Plates by Fitch, and a Map of the County, 5_s._


=MOSSES.=

  Handbook of British Mosses, containing all that are known to be
      natives of the British Isles. By the Rev. M. J. Berkeley, M.A.,
      F.L.S. Demy 8vo, 24 Coloured Plates, 21_s._

  Synopsis of British Mosses, containing Descriptions of all the
      Genera and Species (with localities of the rarer ones) found in
      Great Britain and Ireland. By Charles P. Hobkirk, President of
      the Huddersfield Naturalist's Society. Crown 8vo, 7_s._ 6_d._


=SEAWEEDS.=

  British Seaweeds; an Introduction to the Study of the Marine Algæ
      of Great Britain, Ireland, and the Channel Islands. By S. O.
      Gray. Crown 8vo, with 16 Coloured Plates, drawn expressly for
      the work by W. Fitch, 10_s._ 6_d._

  Phycologia Britannica; or, History of British Seaweeds, containing
      Coloured Figures, Generic and Specific Characters, Synonyms
      and Descriptions of all the Species of Algæ inhabiting the
      Shores of the British Islands. By Dr. W. H. Harvey, F.R.S. New
      Edition. Royal 8vo, 4 vols. 360 Coloured Plates, 7_l._ 10_s._

  Phycologia Australica: a History of Australian Seaweeds, comprising
      Coloured Figures and Descriptions of the more characteristic
      Marine Algæ of New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, South
      Australia and Western Australia, and a Synopsis of all known
      Australian Algæ. By Dr. Harvey, F.R.S. Royal 8vo, 5 vols., 300
      Coloured Plates, 7_l._ 13_s._

  Nereis Australia; or, Algæ of the Southern Ocean, being Figures
      and Descriptions of Marine Plants collected on the Shores of
      the Cape of Good Hope, the extratropical Australian Colonies,
      Tasmania, New Zealand, and the Antarctic Regions. By Dr.
      Harvey, F.R.S. Imperial 8vo, 50 Coloured Plates, 2_l._ 2_s._


=FUNGI.=

  Outlines of British Fungology, containing Characters of above a
      Thousand Species of Fungi, and a Complete List of all that have
      been described as Natives of the British Isles. By the Rev. M.
      J. Berkeley, M.A., F.L.S. Demy 8vo, 24 Coloured Plates, 30_s._

  The Esculent Funguses of England. Containing an Account of their
      Classical History, Uses, Characters, Development, Structure,
      Nutritious Properties, Modes of Cooking and Preserving, &c. By
      C. D. Badham, M.D. Second Edition. Edited by F. Currey, F.R.S.
      Demy 8vo, 12 Coloured Plates, 12_s._

  Illustrations of British Mycology, comprising Figures and
      Descriptions of the Funguses of interest and novelty indigenous
      to Britain. By Mrs. T. J. Hussey. Royal 4to. Second Series, 50
      Coloured Plates, £4 10_s._

  Clavis Agaricinorum: an Analytical Key to the British Agaricini,
      with Characters of the Genera and Subgenera. By Worthington G.
      Smith, F.L.S. Six Plates. 2_s._ 6_d._


=SHELLS AND MOLLUSKS.=

  Elements of Conchology; an Introduction to the Natural History of
      Shells, and of the Animals which form them. By Lovell Reeve,
      F.L.S. Royal 8vo, 2 vols. 62 Coloured Plates, £2 16_s._

  Conchologia Iconica; or, Figures and Descriptions of the Shells
      of Mollusks, with remarks on their Affinities, Synonymy, and
      Geographical Distribution. By Lovell Reeve, F.L.S. Demy 4to, in
      double Parts, with 16 Coloured Plates. 20_s._

      A detailed list of Monographs and Volumes published may be had.

  Conchologia Indica; Illustrations of the Land and Freshwater Shells
      of British India. Edited by Sylvanus Hanley, F.L.S., and
      William Theobald, of the Geological Survey of India. 4to, Parts
      I. to VI., each with 20 Coloured Plates, 20_s._

  The Edible Mollusks of Great Britain and Ireland, with the Modes
      of Cooking them. By M. S. Lovell. Crown 8vo, with 12 Coloured
      Plates, 8_s._ 6_d._


=INSECTS.=

  Harvesting Ants and Trap-door Spiders; Notes and Observations on
      their Habits and Dwellings. By J. T. Moggridge, F.L.S. Coloured
      Plates, 10_s._ 6_d._

  British Insects. A Familiar Description of the Form, Structure,
      Habits, and Transformations of Insects. By E. F. Staveley,
      Author of "British Spiders." Crown 8vo, with 16 beautifully
      Coloured Steel Plates and numerous Wood-Engravings, 14_s._

  British Beetles; an Introduction to the Study of our Indigenous
      Coleoptera. By E. C. Rye. Crown 8vo, 16 Coloured Steel Plates,
      comprising Figures of nearly 100 Species, engraved from Natural
      Specimens, expressly for the work, by E. W. Robinson, and 11
      Wood-Engravings of Dissections by the Author, 10_s._ 6_d._

  British Bees; an Introduction to the Study of the Natural History
      and Economy of the Bees Indigenous to the British Isles. By W.
      E. Shuckard. Crown 8vo, 16 Coloured Steel Plates, containing
      nearly 100 Figures, engraved from Natural Specimens, expressly
      for the work, by E. W. Robinson, and Woodcuts of Dissections,
      10_s._ 6_d._

  British Butterflies and Moths; an Introduction to the Study of our
      Native Lepidoptera. By H. T. Stainton. Crown 8vo, 16 Coloured
      Steel Plates, containing Figures of 100 Species, engraved from
      Natural Specimens expressly for the work by E. W. Robinson, and
      Wood-Engravings, 10_s._ 6_d._

  British Spiders; an Introduction to the Study of the Araneidæ found
      in Great Britain and Ireland. By E. F. Staveley. Crown 8vo, 16
      Plates, containing Coloured Figures of nearly 100 Species, and
      40 Diagrams, showing the number and position of the eyes in
      various Genera, drawn expressly for the work by Tuffen West,
      and 44 Wood-Engravings, 10_s._ 6_d._

  Curtis's British Entomology. Illustrations and Descriptions of
      the Genera of Insects found in Great Britain and Ireland,
      containing Coloured Figures, from Nature, of the most rare and
      beautiful Species, and, in many instances, upon the plants on
      which they are found. 8 vols. Royal 8vo, 770 Coloured Plates,
      £28.


=Or in separate Monographs.=

  _Orders._    _Plates._  £  _s._ _d._

  Aphaniptera      2      0    2    0
  Coleoptera     256     12   16    0
  Dermaptera       1      0    1    0
  Dictyoptera      1      0    1    0
  Diptera        103      5    3    0
  Hemiptera       32      1   12    0
  Homoptera       21      1    1    0
  Hymenoptera    125      6    5    0
  Lepidoptera    193      9   13    0
  Neuroptera      13      0   13    0
  Omaloptera       6      0    6    0
  Orthoptera       5      0    5    0
  Strepsiptera     3      0    3    0
  Trichoptera      9      0    9    0

"Curtis's Entomology," which Cuvier pronounced to have "reached the
ultimatum of perfection," is still the standard work on the Genera
of British Insects. The Figures executed by the author himself, with
wonderful minuteness and accuracy, have never been surpassed, even if
equalled. The price at which the work was originally published was
£43 16_s._

  Insecta Britannica; Vol. III., Diptera. By Francis Walker, F.L.S.
      8vo, with 10 Plates, 25_s._


=ANTIQUARIAN.=

  Bewick's Woodcuts. Impressions of Upwards of 2000 Woodblocks,
      engraved, for the most part, by Thomas and John Bewick;
      including Illustrations of various kinds for Books, Pamphlets,
      and Broadsides; Cuts for Private Gentlemen, Public Companies,
      Clubs, &c.; Exhibitions, Races, Newspapers, Shop Cards, Invoice
      Heads, Bar Bills, &c. With an Introduction, a Descriptive
      Catalogue of the Blocks, and a List of the Books and Pamphlets
      illustrated. By the Rev. T. Hugo, M.A., F.R.S.L., F.S.A. In one
      large volume, imperial 4to, gilt top, with full-length steel
      Portrait of Thomas Bewick. £6 6_s._

  The Bewick Collector and Supplement. A Descriptive Catalogue of the
      Works of Thomas and John Bewick, including Cuts, in various
      states, for Books and Pamphlets, Private Gentlemen, Public
      Companies, Exhibitions, Races, Newspapers, Shop Cards, Invoice
      Heads, Bar Bills, Coal Certificates, Broadsides, and other
      miscellaneous purposes, and Wood Blocks. With an Appendix of
      Portraits, Autographs, Works of Pupils, &c. 292 Cuts from
      Bewick's own Blocks. By the Rev. Thomas Hugo, M.A., F.S.A. 2
      vols. demy 8vo, price 42_s._; imperial 8vo (limited to 100
      copies), with a fine Steel Engraving of Thomas Bewick, £4 4_s._
      The Supplement, with 180 Cuts, may be had separately; price,
      small paper, 21_s._; large paper, 42_s._

  Sacred Archæology; a Popular Dictionary of Ecclesiastical Art
      and Institutions, from Primitive to Modern Times. Comprising
      Architecture, Music, Vestments, Furniture Arrangement, Offices,
      Customs, Ritual Symbolism, Ceremonial Traditions, Religious
      Orders, &c., of the Church Catholic in all Ages. By Mackenzie
      E. C. Walcott, B.D. Oxon., F.S.A., Præcentor and Prebendary of
      Chichester Cathedral. Demy 8vo, 18_s._

  A Manual of British Archæology. By Charles Boutell, M.A. 20
      Coloured Plates, 10_s._ 6_d._

  Man's Age in the World according to Holy Scripture and Science. By
      An Essex Rector. 8_s._ 6_d._

  The Antiquity of Man; an Examination of Sir Charles Lyell's recent
      Work. By S. R. Pattison, F.G.S. Second Edition. 8vo, 1_s._


=MISCELLANEOUS.=

=International Series of Elementary Text Books on Natural Science.=

  Zoology. By Adrian J. Ebell, Ph.B., M.D. Part I.: Structural
      Distinctions, Functions, and Classification of the Orders of
      Animals, 1_s._

  Lahore to Yarkand. Incidents of the Route and Natural History of
      the Countries traversed by the Expedition of 1870, under T.
      D. Forsyth, Esq., C.B. By George Henderson, M.D., F.L.S.,
      F.R.G.S., and Allan O. Hume, Esq., C.B., F.Z.S. With 32
      Coloured Plates of Birds, 6 of Plants, 26 Photographic Views,
      Map, and Geological Sections, 42_s._

  On Intelligence. By H. Taine, D.C.L. Oxon. Translated from the
      French by T. D. Haye, and revised, with additions, by the
      Author. Part I. 8_s._ 6_d._ Part II. 10_s._, or, complete in
      One Volume, 18_s._

  The Young Collector's Handy Book of Recreative Science. By the Rev.
      H. P. Dunster, M.A. Cuts. 3_s._ 6_d._

  The Gladiolus: its History, Cultivation, and Exhibition. By the
      Rev. H. Honywood Dombrain, B.A. 1_s._

  The Birds of Sherwood Forest; with Observations on their Nesting,
      Habits, and Migrations. By W. J. Sterland. Crown 8vo, 4 Plates.
      7_s._ 6_d._ coloured.

  The Naturalist in Norway; or, Notes on the Wild Animals, Birds,
      Fishes, and Plants of that Country, with some account of the
      principal Salmon Rivers. By the Rev. J. Bowden, LL.D. Crown
      8vo, 8 Coloured Plates. 10_s._ 6_d._

  The Zoology of the Voyage of H.M.S. _Samarang_, under the command
      of Captain Sir Edward Belcher, C.B., during the Years 1843-46.
      By Professor Owen, Dr. J. E. Gray, Sir J. Richardson, A. Adams,
      L. Reeve, and A. White. Edited by Arthur Adams, F.L.S. Royal
      4to, 55 Plates, mostly coloured, £3 10_s._

  A Survey of the Early Geography of Western Europe, as connected
      with the First Inhabitants of Britain, their Origin, Language,
      Religious Rites, and Edifices. By Henry Lawes Long, Esq. 8vo,
      6_s._

  The Geologist. A Magazine of Geology, Palæontology, and Mineralogy.
      Illustrated with highly-finished Wood Engravings. Edited by S.
      J. Mackie, F.G.S., F.S.A. Vols. V. and VI., each, with numerous
      Wood-Engravings, 18_s._ Vol. VII. 9_s._

  The Stereoscopic Magazine. A Gallery for the Stereoscope of
      Landscape Scenery, Architecture, Antiquities, Natural History,
      Rustic Character, &c. With Descriptions. 5 vols., each complete
      in itself and containing 50 Stereographs, £2 2_s._

  Everybody's Weather-Guide. The Use of Meteorological Instruments
      clearly Explained, with Directions for Securing at any time
      a probable Prognostic of the Weather. By A. Steinmetz, Esq.,
      Author of "Sunshine and Showers," &c. 1_s._

  Sunshine and Showers: their Influences throughout Creation. A
      Compendium of Popular Meteorology. By Andrew Steinmetz, Esq.
      Crown 8vo, Wood-Engravings, 7_s._ 6_d._

  The Reasoning Power in Animals. By the Rev. J. S. Watson, M.A.
      Crown 8vo, 9_s._

  Manual of Chemical Analysis, Qualitative and Quantitative; for the
      Use of Students. By Dr. Henry M. Noad, F.R.S. New Edition.
      Crown 8vo. 109 Wood-Engravings, 16_s._ Or, separately, Part
      I., 'QUALITATIVE,' New Edition, new Notation, 6_s._; Part II.,
      'QUANTITATIVE,' 10_s._ 6_d._

  Phosphorescence; or, the Emission of Light by Minerals, Plants,
      and Animals. By Dr. T. L. Phipson, F.C.S. Small 8vo, 30
      Wood-Engravings and Coloured Frontispiece, 5_s._

  Meteors, Aerolites, and Falling Stars. By Dr. T. L. Phipson, F.C.S.
      Crown 8vo, 25 Woodcuts and Lithographic Frontispiece, 6_s._

  The Artificial Production of Fish. By Piscarius. Third Edition.
      1_s._

  Live Coals; or, Faces from the Fire. By L. M. Bodgen, "Acheta,"
      Author of 'Episodes of Insect Life,' etc. Dedicated, by Special
      Permission, to H.R.H. Field-Marshal the Duke of Cambridge.
      Royal 4to, 35 Original Sketches printed in colours, 21_s._

  Caliphs and Sultans; being Tales omitted in the ordinary English
      Version of "The Arabian Nights' Entertainments," freely
      rewritten and rearranged. By S. Hanley, F.L.S. 6_s._


=SERIALS.=

  The Botanical Magazine. Figures and Descriptions of New and Rare
      Plants of interest to the Botanical Student, and suitable
      for the Garden, Stove, or Greenhouse. By Dr. J. D. Hooker,
      F.R.S. Monthly, with 6 Coloured Plates, 3_s._ 6_d._ Annual
      Subscription, post free, 42_s._

    Re-issue of the Third Series in monthly vols., 42_s._ each; to
        Subscribers for the entire Series, 36_s._ each.

  The Floral Magazine. New Series, enlarged to Royal 4to. Figures
      and Descriptions of Select New Flowers for the Garden, Stove,
      or Conservatory. Monthly, with 4 Coloured Plates, 3_s._ 6_d._
      Annual Subscription, post free, 42_s._

  Orchids: and How to Grow them in India and other Tropical Climates.
      By Samuel Jennings, F.L.S., F.R.H.S., late Vice-President of
      the Agri-Horticultural Society of India. In Monthly Parts, with
      4 Coloured Plates, 5_s._ each Part.

  Select Orchidaceous Plants. By Robert Warner. 3 Coloured Plates,
      10_s._ 6_d._

  Conchologia Iconica. By Lovell Reeve, F.L.S., and G. B. Sowerby,
      F.L.S. In Double Parts, with 16 Coloured Plates, 20_s._

  Conchologia Indica. The Land and Freshwater Shells of British
      India. In Parts, with 20 Coloured Plates, 20_s._


=FORTHCOMING WORKS.=

  St. Helena. A Physical, Historical, and Topographical Description
      of the Island, including its Geology, Fauna, Flora, and
      Meteorology. By J. C. Melliss, C.E., F.G.S., F.L.S.

  Genera Plantarum. By Bentham and Hooker. Vol. II.

  Flora of India. By Dr. Hooker and others.

  Natural History of Plants. By Prof. Baillon.

  Flora Australiensis. By G. Bentham. Vol. VII.

  Flora of Tropical Africa. By Prof. Oliver.

  Flora Capensis.


London: L. REEVE & CO., 5, Henrietta St., Covent Garden.



Transcriber's Note


Minor typos corrected. Text rearranged so that illustrations do not
split paragraphs. For a number of species that list a pair of alternate
Genera in italics with an unitalic "or" between them in the text, the
italics markup includes the "or".

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARVESTING ANTS AND TRAP-DOOR
SPIDERS AND SUPPLEMENT ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
